--- bibliography: "/Users/lok/Dropbox/diss/repo/src/diss.bib" csl:
"/Users/lok/Dropbox/diss/repo/src/chicago-fullnote-bibliography.csl"
geometry: "left=1.5in,right=1in,top=1.5in,bottom=1.5in" header-includes:
- - - fontsize: 12pt numbersections: true title: Deliberative
Probabilism author: Lok C. Chan ---

\# Introduction

Historically, empiricism is often associated with a flavor of
foundationalism that holds that empirical evidence must in some sense be
untainted - if experience is to serve as the objective foundation of
knowledge, it must be unsullied by our attitudes, beliefs, and values.
It is without a doubt motivated by a conception of rationality familiar
to philosophers, because of Descartes' method of doubt:

\textgreater{} Reason now leads me to think that I should hold back my
assent from opinions which are not completely certain and indubitable
just as carefully as I do from those which are patently false.{[}@med
17{]}

The idea is that it is irrational to hold unjustified opinions, and the
empiricist response is to find a way in which our knowledge can be
justified by some indubitable experience. Quine is arguably the last
great empiricist in this tradition, even though it is not immediately
obvious. In "Epistemology Naturalized", Quine describes what he takes be
'conceptual' and 'doctrinal' cores of empiricist epistemology. The
conceptual core of empiricism, according to Quine, is concerned with the
explication of our concepts in terms of more "basic" concepts, which
refers directly to our sense experience, and the doctrinal side aims to
show that all of our justified beliefs can be inferentially traced to a
set of foundational and self-justified propositions.{[}@epistnat
70-78{]} Even though Quine has claimed to have jettisoned these
traditional empiricist commitments, and replaced them with a naturalized
epistemology, he has not resolutely renounced this empiricist project:
his idea of epistemology naturalized is simply to replace the
old-fashioned notion "experience" with physicalist equivalent that he
deemed more scientifically respectable. In his last major work, "From
Stimulus to Science", he still pursues the foundationalist project under
the disguise of naturalism, by suggesting ways in which the basis of
science can be reduced to the firing of neural
receptors.{[}@quinefromstim 15-16{]}

Such an attitude also permeates through the works of Carnap, another
great empiricist. *The Logical Structure of the World*, also known by
its German title *Aufbau*, is often considered by Quine as the most
thorough attempt to carry out the project of reductionism, as its aim is
``a step-by-step derivation or 'construction' of all concepts from
certain fundamental concepts...''{[}@aufbau 5{]} Carnap the phenomenal
reductionist is Quine's favorite philosophical foil in virtually all of
his work.

However, in the *Aufbau* there is also an empiricist instinct that is
antithetical to foundationalism: one that emphasizes the role of
decision, intention, and volition in our practice of knowledge. Even
though Carnap spends the major of the *Aufbau* to reduce all concepts in
a language of phenomenal experience, he explains that there is nothing
metaphysically necessary about this design decision---its
appropriateness depends ultimately on the decider's
"standpoint".{[}@aufbau 94-95{]}

In *The Logical Syntax of Language*, he codifies this normative stance
as *the Principle of Tolerance*:

\textgreater{}*It is not our business to set up prohibitions, but to
arrive at conventions... In logic, there are no morals.* Everyone is at
liberty to build up his own logic, i.e., his own form of language, as he
wishes. All that is required of him is that, if he wishes to discuss it,
he must state his methods clearly...{[}@logicalsyntax 51-51{]}

This was evidently prompted by the disputes between logicians and
mathematicians regarding the "correct" language of logic. But the
standard of correctness does not exist until a language is chosen, so in
an important sense, trying to determine which language is better than
another is ultimately futile. However, once we adopt the Principle of
Tolerance, "before us lies the boundless ocean of unlimited
possibilities."{[}@logicalsyntax p.xv, p.50{]}

Carnap, I think, embodies two competing philosophical attitudes: one is
the desire for an algorithmic ideal of rationality, and the other is the
recognition that human rationality is full of gaps. The former point of
view demands the clarity of thought, so that each inferential step is
perfectly secure. The second stance, on the other hands, allows rational
leaps of faith take in the form of making conjectures beyond what is
necessarily implied by our evidence.

The goal of this dissertation can be summarized as a philosophical
exploration of the dynamics between these two styles of thinking within
the context of probabilistic reasoning. My main contention is that both
styles are thinking are needed to make sense of our rationality, and
their interaction must be understood in the respective role they play in
the different *contexts* of inquiry.

The notion of inquiry is an explicit reference to the philosophy of C.
S. Peirce, whose view is an important basis of and inspiration to the
position I aim to defend and develop here. Peirce, as I understand him,
has a systematic understanding of the context-sensitivity of epistemic
judgments. That is, the evaluation of an assertion or a belief cannot be
detached from the context in which it occurs: an assertion of
probability has different normative implications in the context of
abduction, deduction, and induction. My main contention is that an
assertion has no normative force unless it is underwritten by an
epistemic practice that incentivizes the agent to stand by the
obligations imposed upon her.

\textless{}!-- My task involves largely making sense of claims made in
the last paragraph in a way that is compatible with some of Bayesianism
or probabilism. Peirce is a committed frequentist, and, as we will see,
his framework

Because of this I must mention, however, that even though Peirce is a
central figure in the story I want to tell, my aim is primarily to use
him as an inspiration in the development of my own position, instead of
giving an authoritative interpretation of his philosophy.

The picture I want to describe, largely, is this. Before we empirically
engage in a problem of interest, we must deliberate on a framework in
which --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- Each chapter is based on a known problem in formal
epistemology and philosophy of probability and statistics. My general
strategy is to demonstrate how the existing solution fails to address
these problems, and suggest how --\textgreater{}

\#\# Historical Context

How should probability constrain our beliefs? Can degrees of belief be
rational? There are question of a general epistemological interest.
However, within the rich history of probability, we find the major
figures also struggles with the two concepts of rationality described
above. In particular, we see that the dispute between J. M. Keynes and
F. P. Frank as one about whether we should understand the rationality of
degrees of belief as being prohibitive or permissive.

\#\#\# Rational Degrees of Belief

Probability, in Keynes's view, is defined as a logical relation between
a premise and a conclusion. Probability relations are logical, because
this relation belongs to the same conceptual category as the entailment
relation between the premises and conclusion in a deductive argument.
Keynes says:

\textgreater{}Inasmuch as it is always assumed that we can sometimes
judge directly that a conclusion follows from a premiss, it is no great
extension of this assumption to suppose that we can sometimes recognise
that a conclusion partially follows from, or stands in a relation of
probability to, a premiss. {[}@keynes, 57{]}

Keynes' logical interpretation of probability has the advantage of
providing a direct explanation on why probability is *normative*: we
*should* reason in accordance to probability for the same reason that we
should respect a deductive rule like *modus ponens*: the degrees of a
person's partial belief should correspond to the degree to which the
premises render the conclusion probable, whereas in a deductive proof,
one has to accept the conclusion as necessarily true, were the premises
true. Hence Keynes talks about probability not as something we can
attribute to a proposition, or one's attitude of it, but a logical
property of an argument.\^{}{[}There is a technical consequence for
this. If probability is a relation, it follows that it never makes sense
to talk about the probability of an event without in relation to any
other proposition, so for Keynes all probabilities are conditional
probabilities.{]}

As Frequentists often find little use for the idea of degrees of belief,
it is often seen as a notion exclusive to subjective theories of
probability; however Keynes' rational degrees of belief are supposed to
be objective relations independent of the human mind.

More important, in Keynes, we find the foundationalist attitude that he
inherited from the logical atomism of Russell. Keynes accepts Russell's
idea of knowledge by acquaintance: some propositions, such as "I have a
sensation of yellow", are justified by virtue of being perceptually
acquainted with it.{[}@keynes 11-12{]} Furthermore, acquaintance yields
not only knowledge of the senses, but also of logical relations:

\textgreater{}When we know something by argument this must be through
direct acquaintance with some logical relation between the conclusion
and the premiss. In all knowledge, therefore, there is some direct
element; and logic can never be made purely mechanical. All it can do is
so to arrange the reasoning that the logical relations, which have to be
perceived directly, are made explicit and are of a simple kind.
{[}@keynes, 14{]}

This can be puzzling position, considering Keynes's goal is to develop a
formal system of probability, but If logical relations are not
analyzable in terms of empirical features, but an irreducible relation
knowable to us only by perception or intuition, then why would we need a
formal system? Keynes' answer is that everyone's intuitive faculty is
different, "the perceptions of some relations of probability may be
outside the powers of some or all of us," so we need principles to make
these perception explicit and justified. {[}@keynes, 18{]}

One important principle is the *Principle of Indifference*. Laplace is
well-known for articulating a version of it:

\textgreater{} When the probability of a simple event is unknown, one
may suppose that it is equally likely to take on any value from zero to
one... the probability of each of these hypotheses, given the observed
event, is a fraction whose numerator is the probability of the event
under this hypothesis, and whose denominator is the sum of similar
probabilities under each of the hypotheses.{[}@laplace, 20{]}

In other words, when we are in complete ignorance regarding the outcome
of the event, the probability of each possible outcome is:

\[\frac{\text{1}}{\text{\# of total possible hypotheses}}\]

Many have criticized this principle. Peirce, for instance vehemently
rejects it, as he argues that in many cases, especially when the number
of possible outcomes is ambiguous, using the principle will lead to
contradictions. A simple example would be determining the probability of
an unknown object, for example, a marble, having a certain color, say,
red. Suppose I have no information about this marble, so I have no
reason to think the marble is red or not.\^{}{[}Assume that the cover of
the book has only one color.{]} Following the principle, it would seem
that \(P(R) = P(\neg R) = 0.5\). However, we are led to contradictions
when we asks if the book is yellow, black, etc.; because, using the same
reasoning, we would say \(P(Y) = P(\neg Y) = P(B) = P(\neg B) = 0.5\).
The contradiction is that these are mutually exclusive propositions, so
axioms of probability say that their sum cannot go beyond \(1\).

When Keynes wrote *A Treatise on Probability*, he was keenly aware of
the sort of problematic consequences Peirce describes. However, he
thinks that the paradoxes only suggest that the principle is to be
restricted, not abandoned altogether. To begin, he notes that the
crucial terms used in the principle are not clearly defined:

\textgreater{} The principle states that `there must be no known reason
for preferring one of a set of alternatives to any other.' What does
this mean? What are `reasons,' and how are we to know whether they do or
do not justify us in preferring one alternative to another? I do not
know any discussion of Probability in which this question has been so
much as asked.{[}@keynes 58{]}

Instead, he proposes that this clause ought to be explicated in terms of
conditional relevance. That is, to say that we have no reason to prefer
a proposition \(H\) over its alternatives is to say that there is no
evidence such that it is relevant to \(H\) but irrelevant to all the
alternatives. Roughly speaking, \(E\) is relevant to \(H\) on background
knowledge \(K\) if and only if: \[P(H|K) \neq P(H|K\wedge E)\]

According to Keynes, one necessary condition for a justified application
of Indifference is that for a set of \(n\) possible outcomes,
\(H_1,...H_n\), there is no evidential proposition \(E\) such that it is
conditionally relevant to some but not others.

The relevance criterion is necessary but not sufficient, because the
paradoxes need to be dealt with. He argues that the Principle of
Indifference should not be used when the alternatives under
consideration can be further analyzed, or, using his term, "divisible".
Consider again the marble example. The paradox begins with the
assumption that red and not red are the two alternatives. While it is
true that these outcomes are exhaustive, "not red" should be analyzed
before we distribute the probabilities, since it also encompasses the
possibility that it is black, it is blue, etc. So according to Keynes'
conditions, judging \(P(R) = P(\neg R) = 0.5\) is unjustified, since it
is not a legal application of the Principle of Indifference.

With Keynes' version of the principle, we have to know a great deal
about the setup of the sample space, before even entertaining the
possibility of indifference between alternatives. According to Keynes'
proposal, this means that most of our intuitive judgments of
indifference would be illicit. In fact, Keynes admits just as much: he
holds that in many if not most scenarios, the probability of a given
event cannot be given a precise value. For many propositions, it would
be impossible to say anything about their probability at all. Of course,
Keynes is not saying that it is psychologically impossible for us to
have degrees of belief for a proposition that fails to satisfy these
conditions, but he is saying that they would not be *rational* degrees
of belief.

What I want to bring our attention is Keynes' epistemology behind his
theory of probability is fairly foundationalistic. That is, for Keynes
the Principle of Indifference is *normative*. Keynes's view allows the
possibility that one could be mistaken in perceiving indifference, and
to accommodate that he has to rely on the Principle of Indifference as a
normative principle, which 'endeavours to formulate a rule which will
justify judgments of *indifference*.'{[}@keynes 60{]} So, the principle
serves as a standard of correctness by specifying the conditions under
which the uniform distribution of probability among hypotheses is
*rational*, i.e., justified.

In his "Truth and Probability", Ramsey responds to Keynes's view by
rejecting the conception of degree of belief as perceptible logical
relations:

\textgreater{}...there really do not seem to be any such things as the
probability relations {[}Keynes{]} describes. He supposes that, at any
rate in certain cases, they can be perceived; but speaking for myself I
feel confident that this is not true. I do not perceive them, and if I
am to be persuaded that they exist it must be by argument; moreover I
shrewdly suspect that others do not perceive them either, because they
are able to come to so very little agreement as to which of them relates
any two given propositions.

However, part of the appeal of Keynes' theory is that probability itself
is irreducibly normative, since they are objective and logical
relations. It would seem that denying the existence of these logical
relations also robs probability its normative force. Ramsey recognizes
this, and explicitly rejects both the Principle of Indifference and
Keynes' strongly normative conception of rational degrees of belief.

To begin, Ramsey points out that the reason Keynes's position *requires*
principles such as Indifference is that he holds that degrees of belief
must be *justified* before it can be admitted in the calculus of
probability; however, Ramsey thinks that such a demand cannot be
satisfied:

\textgreater{} ...to ask what initial degrees of belief are justified...
seems to me a meaningless question; and even if it had a meaning I do
not see how it could be answered.{[}@ramsey 88{]}

Once this requirement of rationality is jettisoned,

\textgreater{} the Principle of Indifference can now be altogether
dispensed with; we do not regard it as belonging to formal logic to say
what should be a man's expectation of drawing a white or a black ball
from an urn; his original expectations may within the limits of
consistency be any he likes; all we have to point out is that if he has
certain expectations he is bound in consistency to have certain others.
This is simply bringing probability into line with ordinary formal
logic, which does not criticize premisses but merely declares that
certain conclusions are the only ones consistent with them.

Thus Ramsey recognizes the normative nature of Keynes' use of the
principle: it constrains our beliefs such that when the conditions for
Indifference are met, you *should* assign equal probabilities to the
outcomes, otherwise you are *irrational*. As the quote above makes
clear, Ramsey's view makes no such demand. As far as he is concerned, it
is not probability's business to tell people what degrees of belief they
*should* have. Instead, the normative force of probability is the same
as that of deductive logic: it serves as a tool of checking consistency
of a set of beliefs, and no more.

Ramsey, then, is advocating what came to be the standard notion of
Bayesian rationality: coherence. The question has shifted from "what are
rational degrees of belief?" to "is this set of partial beliefs
consistent?" Ramsey's analogy to deductive logic is helpful. Consider
this argument:

1. All Chinese are Martians. 2. Socrates is Chinese. 3. \(\therefore\)
Socrates is a Martian.

Even though the argument contains all false claims, from a deductive
perspective, it is a perfectly valid argument. In the same way, if we
have a definitely fair coin but an agent decides that
\(P(Heads)=0.999\), she is still rational as long as she also believes
\(P(Tails) = 0.001\). This normative point is perhaps the most
influential among the ideas from "Truth and Probability," as Ramsey
gestures toward the use of Dutch book arguments in support of coherence
as a requirement of rationality: anyone who violates the axioms of
probability "could have a book made against him by a cunning better and
would then stand to lose in any event."{[}@ramsey{]} The argument is
based on the assumption that the agent's willingness to bet is based her
degrees of belief and utility function, so an inconsistent set of
partial beliefs would imply contradictory betting behavior that could be
exploited.

For instance, if the agent believe than \(P(Heads) = 0.999\) yet also
simultaneously holding that \(P(Tails) = 0.5\) This means, based on the
assumptions required by Dutch book arguments, you would be willing to
pay respectively \$0.999 and \$0.5 for a bet that pays \$1. So, if a
bookie offers the agent both bets at those prices, which comes to the
total of \$1.499, these bets should appear to be fair, based on her
degrees of belief. But she is guaranteed to lose money from this deal,
since landing on heads and on tails are mutually exclusive, she will win
at most \$1, so she lose \(1.499 - 1 = 0.499\) for sure. This is due to
the fact that she violates the axiom of probability that says that the
sum of the probability of each possible outcome has to be
\(1\).{[}@hajekdutchbook 176{]}

I do not wish to dispute the effectiveness of Dutch book arguments here.
Let us for the sake of argument assume that probabilistic coherence is a
basic requirement of rationality, because the problem I would like to
address is aspects of rationality unaccounted for in Ramsey's view, even
if we grant the use of Dutch book arguments, that is, is coherence a
sufficient substitute for a normative conception of degrees of belief?
L. J. Savage, a strong advocate of Bayesianism and subjective
probability, expresses his doubts about whether consistency is enough:

\textgreater{} According to the personalistic view, the role of the
mathematical theory of probability is to enable the person using it to
detect inconsistencies in his own real or envisaged behavior. It is also
understood that, having detected an inconsistency, he will remove it. An
inconsistency is typically removable in many different ways, among which
the theory gives no guidance for choosing.{[}@savage, p.57{]}

Savage's point can be illustrated by considering the Dutch book case
above: suppose the subject is convinced that her degrees of belief,
\(P(Heads) = 0.999\) and \(P(Tails) = 0.5\) are incoherent: what
normative conclusion should she draw from this? The only advice Ramsey
could give her is that they should add up to 1, but should she lower
\(P(Heads)\) to \(0.5\) or lower \(P(Tails)\) to \(0.001\)? In fact,
there are, quite literally, infinite ways to for her to resolve the
inconsistency. This illuminates the lacuna left open by a descriptive
understanding of degrees of belief, motivated by both an operationalist
understanding of pragmatism and a rejection of Keynes' rational degrees
of belief. In Keynes' framework, assuming that the conditions for the
Principle of Indifference are satisfied, the *only* rational way to
evaluate these probabilities is \(P(Heads) = P(Tails) = 0.5\).

In the paper, Ramsey struggles with this issue: at the end he arrives at
a somewhat vulgar pragmatism that says that an opinion is reasonable
insofar as it works more often than not.{[}@ramsey 93{]} Keynes'
assessment of his debate with Ramsey is telling:

\textgreater{} {[}According to Ramsey,{]} the basis of our degrees of
belief... is part of our human outfit, perhaps given us merely by
natural selection, analogous to our perception and our memories rather
than to formal logic. So far I yield to Ramsey---I think he is right.
But in attempting to distinguish "rational" degrees of belief from
belief in general he was not yet, I think, quite successful. It is not
getting to the bottom of the principle of induction merely to say that
it is a useful mental habit{[}@keynesbio 300-301{]}

The lesson I want to draw from the dispute between Keynes and Ramsey is
this: one of crucial questions regarding the rationality of partial
belief is the rational status of our prior opinions. Keynes, at least in
regard to probabilistic judgments, holds that degrees of belief can be
rational only if they are ultimately justified by some logically
determined and objective priors. The result is a highly skeptical
attitude toward the feasibility of having precise degrees of belief for
most cases. Ramsey's plea for merely reasonable degrees of belief could
be see as the rejection of such a requirement, but, as Keynes points,
this proposal is inadequate unless we can find alternative ways to
articulate the criteria of rationality for degrees of belief. Orthodox
Bayesianism and Voluntarism, the two competing views central to the
discussion in chapter 2, can be seen as two ways in which this need can
be addressed.

\#\#\# Bayesianism and Voluntarism

In *The Will to Believe*, van Fraassen tries to offer a version of
probabilism that is distinct from Bayesianism. In the context of formal
epistemology, *probabilism* can be characterized as the following two
theses:

1. The strength of a belief can be measured numerically as *degrees of
belief*. 2. The rationality of degrees of belief is governed by the
axioms of probability.

Even though 'probabilism' is often used as a synonymy for 'Bayesianism',
van Fraassen makes a subtle distinction between the two:

\textgreater{} So: I am a probabilist, though not a Bayesian. Like the
Bayesian I hold that rational persons with the same evidence can still
disagree in their opinion generally; but I do not accept the Bayesian
recipes for opinion change as rationally compelling. I do accept the
Bayesian extension of the canons of logic to all forms of opinion and
opinion change.{[}@bvflaws 175{]}

Evidently, he is taking "probabilism" to be a broader term than
"Bayesianism". In particular, Bayesianism addresses the following issues
on top of probabilism:

1. The rationality of our *existing* opinions and, 2. The rational
procedure to *revise* these opinions.

What van Fraassen calls *Orthodox* Bayesianism satisfies the second by
holding that the only justifiable way to revise one's opinion is through
Bayes' theorem.\^{}{[}To be more precise, we should also distinguish
*epistemic* Bayesians and *statistical* Bayesians. In this paper, I
follow van Fraassen in using the term 'Orthodox Bayesian' to describe an
epistemological position that holds a strict view on belief revision
just described. A Bayesian *statistician* might think that belief do
come in degrees and that Bayesian statistics is the best framework for
drawing statistical inferences, but she might not think that all beliefs
can be meaningfully given a Bayesian analysis.{]} This is often codified
as the so-called rule of

\textgreater{} *Conditionalization*: one is rationally compelled to
update one's prior degree of belief for \(H\) in light of the
acquisition of relevant evidence \(E\) via the application of Bayes'
theorem, which determines the posterior opinion degree of belief
\(P(H|E)\).{[}@beliefuly 17{]}

Conditionalization, of course, does not say anything about the rational
status of existing opinions, i.e., priors. Orthodox Bayesians, in this
regard, are subjective Bayesians: priors do not have to be justified.
From the epistemological perspective, this is a move against skepticism,
for it rejects the assumption that knowledge and rationality presupposes
the ability to justify all of my existing opinions. In other words,
Orthodox Bayesians side with Ramsey in rejecting that degrees of belief
must be justified to be rational.

Using Peirce's terminology, which van Fraassen adopts,
conditionalization is an *explicative* procedure, which does not go
beyond what's implied by facts and logic, as opposed to be being
*ampliative*, which extrapolates beyond
them.\^{}{[}@probabilityofinduction 297{]} We already saw the same idea
from Ramsey, who sees the normative role of probability as the logic of
consistency between partial beliefs. Orthodox Bayesianism, however,
further legislates the rational revision of belief by imposing
conditionalization, which fills the normative gap pointed out by Savage
and Ramsey. So, instead of Ramsey's "useful mental habits", Orthodox
Bayesians regard the ideal Bayesian agent, who revises her belief by
following conditionalization, as the standard of rationality. As van
Fraassen engagingly puts it, this purely explicative conception of
belief revision allows the Orthodox Bayesian "to live a happy and useful
life by conscientiously updating the opinions gained at his mother's
knees, in response to his own experience."{[}@bvflaws 178{]} This is
assuming that conditionalization will allow a set of initially diverse
priors to eventually converge into the same posterior.

Van Fraassen, however, rejects the idea that the ideal Bayesian agent is
the *only* model of rationality. In particular, he insists that
rationality cannot be wholly reduced to following an explicative rule.
The result is an expanded notion of rationality. This alternative
conception of rationality maintains that:

\textgreater{} what is rational to believe includes anything that one is
not rationally compelled to disbelieve. And similarly for ways of
change: the rational ways to change your opinions include any that
remain within the bounds of rationality---which may be very wide.
*Rationality is only bridled irrationality.*{[}@bvflaws 171-172{]}

Van Fraassen calls his position *voluntarism*, so let us call the
voluntaristic conception of rationality. It is voluntaristic in the
sense that an agent is free to adopt any opinion that is "within the
bounds of rationality".

At a glance, van Fraassen does not seem to be offering anything
different than Ramsey's coherentism. It sounds as though we are simply
returning the subjectivist idea that priors do not have to be justified.
But van Fraassen's view is actually subtler than that, and to see this
we must understand the pragmatist root voluntarism has.

Van Fraassen does not claim to be a pragmatist, but he credits James as
the originator of his voluntarism, which, in its most naive formulation,
says that the acceptance of belief is a matter of the will, that is, to
believe a proposition is to make a *decision* to believe the
proposition. Unsurprisingly, this is traditionally a theological
position, which is the context of *the Will to Believe*. Pascal's Wager
is the *locus classicus* of voluntarism: the belief in God, Pascal tells
us, cannot be resolved by the appeal to evidence or reason; instead, it
is more akin to making a decision based on expected utility. Because we
gain infinite utility from believing in God correctly and losing very
little otherwise, the argument goes, the rational thing is to decide
that God exists.{[}@pascal sec. 233{]}

To be clear, my intention is not to deal with the theological issues
here, but the difficult task at hand that is to explain how van Fraassen
puts forth voluntarism as a general epistemological position about
degrees of belief. To go from Pascal to van Fraassen, we must understand
how James develops his voluntarism in response to Clifford.

Clifford, at least as characterized by James, is arguing for a standard
of rationality on which the acceptance of a proposition without
sufficient evidence is irrational, *even if the proposition were true*.
Clifford is clear that this epistemic duty is categorical: "It is wrong
always, everywhere, and for every one, to believe anything upon
insufficient evidence." {[}@jameswill 8{]} To van Fraassen, this is
paradigmatic example of a compulsory conception of rationality.
{[}@bvflaws 171{]} According to this picture of rationality, what is
rational to believe for a person is restricted to those for she has
justification, which could be in the form of evidence or logical
necessity. This, without a doubt, is motivated by same intuition about
rationality that motivated the traditional empiricists.

James argues against Clifford's view by introducing epistemic values
into the discussion: James suggests that we are pulled in two directions
in the formation of our opinions:

\textgreater{} There are two ways of looking at our duty in the matter
of opinion\ldots{} *We must know the truth; and we must avoid error*,---
these are our first and great commandments as would-be knowers; but they
are not two ways of stating an identical commandment, they are two
separable laws. {[}@jameswill 17{]}

Why are they separate? Consider two types of epistemic agents: a greedy
truth-seeker and a unmovable skeptic. The former is driven by nothing
but the hunger for information, while the latter would rather accepts
nothing that is short of being absolutely certain. To satisfy their
respective values, their epistemic policies would be quite different:
the truth-seeker should maximize her true beliefs by believing in
everything, including contradictions and other falsehood. A skeptic can
avoid all errors by refusing to believe in anything. So, not only are
the desire for truth and the aversion to errors two separate epistemic
values, they lead to epistemic policies that are diametrically opposed
to each other.

These extreme epistemic policies seem absurd to us, because, we regard
both the attainment of truth and the avoidance of error as being
valuable. Satisfying one, however, often undermines another, due to our
limited resources: if we had infinite cognitive power, memory, and time,
we could perhaps learn in a way that guarantees the accuracy of our
information. But this is not what our epistemic life is like: we lack
the resource to fully fulfill these competing concerns: reaching for the
truth often means opening oneself to the risk of error, and to be
cautious against believing falsehood often lowers one's chance of the
truth. As a result, we are forced to find a measure of balance.

From an argumentative point of view, the purpose of James' introduction
of epistemic values is to frame Clifford's position in a new light. That
is, Clifford's call to suspend one's judgment is motivated by the
*decision* to take priority in the avoidance of error over the the
desire for truth.

\textgreater{} "he who says 'Better go without belief forever than
believe a lie!' merely shows his own preponderant private horror of
becoming a dupe. He may be critical of many of his desires and fears,
but this fear he slavishly obeys{[}@jameswill 18{]}

To agree with Clifford, then, one must decide that the price of the
security of skepticism is missing out on a chance in receiving the
truth---this is especially prominent in Clifford's insistence that it is
better to suspend judgment to accidentally come into the possession of a
true belief. But in some context, this seems hardly the rational course
of action:

\textgreater{} It is like a general informing his soldiers that it is
better to keep out of battle forever than to risk a single
wound.{[}@jameswill 19{]}

What James is arguing, then, that Clifford's position presupposes that
the avoiding the risk of error is *always* more important than knowing
the truth. James seems to be suggesting that, in theological and moral
matters, this cannot be the right, since these questions always have a
high degree of *urgency*, and his contention is that in such a
situation, one has the right to accept these beliefs, as long as they
are committed to make the practical difference implied by the acceptance
of these beliefs.

It is clear that van Fraassen aims to create a contrast between James
and Clifford in service of his alternative to Orthodox Bayesianism. In
James' view, we find an argument for a more permissive notion of
rationality that makes room for leaps of faith that are not possible
under the algorithmic view of rationality depicted in Orthodox
Bayesianism.

\# Reflection Principle and the Pragmatic Maxim

Should my current opinions be constrained by what I expect myself to
belief in the future? This is the concern addressed by the principle of
Reflection, which answers affirmatively:

\textgreater{} *General Reflection Principle.* My current opinion about
event \(E\) must lie in the range spanned by the possible opinions I may
come to have about \(E\) at later time \(t\), as far as my opinion is
concerned.{[}@beliefuly 16{]}

In the context of probabilistic judgment, Reflection implies that your
current credence, i.e., subjective probability, for the proposition
\(K\) now at \(t1\) must be one of the values you consider as possible
in the future at \(t2\). Van Frassen formulates this general version of
the principle in order to accommodate imprecise probabilities and vague
opinions. I put leave issues regarding imprecise probabilities aside:
when talking about probability, in our context it is sufficient to a
version of Reflection that presupposes precise probability:

\textgreater{} *Special Reflection Principle.*
\(P_t(E|p_{t+x} (E) = r)=r\)

In words, this formulation says: your subject probability for \(E\)
currently at \(t\), given in the future at time \(t+x\) it will be
\(r\), should also be \(r\). For example, if tomorrow you will come to
believe that the probability of rain is \(0.5\), then your current
probability of rain should also be \(0.5\).

Why should what I think I will believe in the future constrain my
current opinion? The main purpose of this chapter is to demystify
Reflection. In particular, I shall argue for the novel view that
Reflection is a principle of *abductive* reasoning: it regulates the
rationality of the epistemic judgments made in the context of abduction.
My contention is that Reflection is a guiding principle of what Peirce
calls the rationality of deliberate conduct. One criticism of
voluntarism I will focus on is that it does not recognize the importance
of the context sensitivity of epistemic judgment.

\textless{}!-- The ideas covered in the chapter will be further
developed in the rest of the dissertation, so it will be more expository
in nature. The first main section is devoted to explain an
epistemological position called *voluntarism*, which, as van Fraassen
suggests, the philosophical framework that underlies Reflection. The
second section introduces the Peirce's Pragmatic Maxim and its relation
to the idea of deliberate conduct. The third section will focus
situating Reflection within the context of abduction. --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!--

In other words, Reflection Principle is supposed to a norm for X. In
other words, these examples take Reflection out of its proper context,
so its use is illicit. If we Z In this context, memory loss and
mind-altering drugs are *not* . Regarding memory loss, the response is
simple: if it is important, *write it down*.

In the next section, I will raise a problem for Reflection of my own.
Unlike the counterexamples above, however, the cases I am interested in
are grounded in our actual scientific practice. Moreover, the issue I
shall raise does not depend on some dramatic --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- The idea that probabilistic rationality requires a
normative principle about epistemic practice is something noted, on
different occasions, by J. M. Keynes and A. J. Ayer.{[}@keynes,
p.84-85{]} {[}@ayerpae, p.56{]} Both point out that theories of
probabilistic rationality often explicitly or implicitly stipulate that
we should use all of our available evidence. Carnap, for instance, calls
this *the Requirement of Total Evidence* for his inductive logic.
{[}@carnapprob, p.211{]} The idea is that the credence for the belief
\(K\) should be conditional on \(E\), which is our total evidence. The
problem is that this is not enough: this picture of rationality requires
the agent to ascertain the correct degree of credence, which is a
relation between the proposition \(K\) and all relevant evidence \(E\),
but this says nothing about how we ought to maintain rationality over
time. Once the agent has reached internal coherence based on her total
evidence at the time, she has no incentive to gather more evidence.

--\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- Now we can make some sense of van Fraassen's claim that
voluntarism is a less restrictive alternative to Orthodox Bayesianism.
We saw that the strict adherence to conditionalization embodies the sort
of epistemic security valued by Clifford. The upshot of this is that the
revision of belief is always explicative. James' voluntarism, however,
allows ampliative reasoning: --\textgreater{} \textless{}!-- It is
important to note that van Fraassen does not argue directly for
voluntarism. His strategy is to argue for the Reflection Principle, and
proposes that voluntarism is the best position to accommodate the
requirement of Reflection. It is hard to appreciate the connection
between Reflection and voluntarism until we discuss the role played by
the Pragmatic Maxim. But we are at least in the position to see how
Reflection dovetails the voluntaristic conception of rationality:

To anticipate: I accept Reflection but does not think voluntarism is the
best epistemological position to accommodate it, so a key question
central to my thesis is to what extent the acceptance of Reflection
implies voluntarism. I will flag one critical problem that will be
addressed in the later chapters. James does not seem to recognize the
possibility that the rationality of these value-laden decisions can be
highly situational and interdependent.{[}@hardchoices 36-37{]}
--\textgreater{}

\#\# Moore's Paradox and Self-Sabotaging

I have presented a contrast between Orthodox Bayesianism and van
Fraassen's voluntarism, by suggesting that conditionalization provides a
rational constraint that is explicative in nature, while voluntarism
allows ampliative extrapolation beyond the implication of the evidence.
Still, even if voluntarism presupposes a more liberal conception of
rationality, it must impose least *some* constraints on our beliefs.
This is what the Reflection Principle is supposed to do; it aims to
replace conditionalization as the overarching principle of rationality;
however, what how we conceive our future selves has to do with
rationality is still rather mysterious. To understand this, we have to
consider the implication of violating Reflection. The possibility of
being Dutch-booked is part of it, but not the full story. The crucial
idea is how the violation of Reflection can lead to the so-called
"Moore's Paradox."

To begin, we have to distinguish a Moorean *absurdity* and Moore's
*paradox*. A Moorean absurdity arises when a person utters or thinks
that `\(P\) and I don't believe that \(P\)'. For example,

\textgreater{} - It's raining but I don't believe that it is.

Logically speaking, such an utterance or thought is not contradictory.
There is no logical connection between my belief in the rain and whether
it is actually raining. This can be demonstrated easily by rephrasing
the same proposition from a third person point of view:

\textgreater{} - It's raining but Lok doesn't believe that is.

Unlike the former, this could easily be a statement about an error on my
part. Moore's *paradox* is the thought that, even though logic tells us
that such a proposition is perfectly consistent, it seems absurd for
anyone to *assert* such the first-person-perspective version of the
proposition.{[}@greenmoore 190{]} The source of absurdity is from the
conjunction of someone asserting that it is raining, and the disavowal
of the belief in what she just asserts. Another way to phrase the
paradox without appealing to assertion is to say that a Moorean
absurdity is a proposition that is logically consistent but not
believable. That is, I cannot, without succumbing to absurdity,
attribute to myself the belief that it's P and I don't believe that P.

What does the possibility of Moorean absurdity suggest? According to one
analysis of the notion of absurdity, it is the result of a violation of
established norms. That is, there are implicit standard that govern the
norms between asserting \(P\) and believing \(P\), such that one is
expected to believe what she asserts. Of course, this is not to say that
people do not make deceptive assertion. In such a case the norms are
being exploited for various reasons, but in those cases the speakers do
not announce their intention to deceive. The absurdity comes from the
fact that the norms are being explicitly broken.

One explanation for Moore's paradox is that it signifies a violation of
the underlying norms for a *speech act*. The idea is that many of our
linguistic practices carry non-linguistic effects beyond the content of
what's being said. Consider a classic example of a speech act: making a
promise. Speech acts theorists argue that there is a normative link
between uttering "I promise that \(p\)" and the intention to bring about
\(p\) in the future. A promise could be deemed infelicitous, when a
speaker fail to fulfill the normative conditions necessary for the act
of promising to be successful. Consider J. L. Austin's example: "I
promise to do \(X\) but I do not intend to do it{[}@austin 54{]} Like
"\(P\), but I do not believe \(P\)", this proposition appear absurd,
because they violate the implicit norm that when one makes a promise,
she is expected to have the sincere intention to fulfill the said
promise.

More important, the expression of the intention implies that the
promisor is willingly placing oneself under an obligation to the
promisee. {[}@searle 60{]} So to make the promise, while simultaneously
expressing the lack of intention to carry it out is an absurd act of
*self-sabotaging*. In the last section, we saw that the voluntaristic
conception of rationality holds that any belief that is with the "bounds
of reason" is rational. Van Fraassen does not clearly define what those
bounds are, but he does spell out some specific conditions. One is that
self-sabotaging is always irrational, which depends on a distinction
between *ex post* and *ex ante* notions of rational evaluation:

\textgreater{} Any act of decision can be evaluated in two ways. if we
evaluate it beforehand, we ask how *reasonable* it is, and, afterward,
we ask to what extent it was *vindicated*... Therefore a minimal
criterion of reasonableness is that *you should not sabotage your
possibilities of vindication beforehand* {[}@bvflaws 157{]}

For instance, a promise could be unreasonable if the action required to
fulfill the promise is impossible, since this means the promiser will
never be vindicated. On the other hand, people do make insincere
promises, and sometimes that would be the rational thing to do: I could
be vindicated in making a insincere promise, If it turned out that doing
saved my life; however, my promise would be absurd, if I were to make an
insincere promise *and* announce my insincerity.

Van Fraassen's contention is that a probabilistic judgment, for example:

\textgreater{} - It seems more likely to me---supposing that it stays
this cold---that it will snow than that it will rain.

is more like the speech act of making a promise than a statement of
fact.{[}@beliefwill 252-255{]} To begin, we can consider what it would
mean for a probabilistic judgment to be a statement of fact. Ramsey's
operationalist definition, as discussed in the last chapter, seems to
fit the bill: an autobiographical report of one's degrees of belief,
elicited through a combination of neutral propositions and utility
evaluation, is a causal effect of the reporter's disposition to act, so
a probabilistic judgment is interpreted as a description of the agent's
psychological state, much like reports of an object's responses to being
scratched by different substances are descriptions of the object's
hardness.

In contrast, consider a passage, which van Fraassen cites approvingly,
from Bruno De Finetti, another progenitor of modern Bayesianism:

\textgreater{} Any assertion concerning probabilities of events is
merely expressing of somebody's opinion and not itself an event. There
is no meaning, therefore, in asking whether such an assertion is true or
false or less probable.

\textgreater{}The situation is different, of course, if we are concerned
not with the assertion itself but with whether "somebody holds or
expresses such an opinion or acts according to it"; for this is a real
event or proposition.{[}@definepis 189{]}

De Finetti's distinction can be phrased within the framework of speech
acts theory: it is a statement of fact that Lok Chan made a promise to
do \(X\) today at 5PM. It would be true if I did make such a promise,
but it makes no sense to ask if the promise itself is true. I can make a
successful promise by clearly expressing my intention to fulfill my
obligation. De Finetti appears to be saying something quite similar: an
assertion is an *expression* of opinion that itself cannot be true or
false.

In agreement with De Finetti, Van Fraassen argues that making a
probabilistic judgment is more like making a promise and reporting an
autobiographic report about one's psychological state. To make this
argument, van Fraassen tries to demonstrate that this statement

\textgreater{} - my current degree of belief for \(A\) is \(x\), but I
expect it to be a different value \(y\) in the future.

to be an instance of a Moorean absurdity. More specifically, anyone who
asserts the above is said to be *self-sabotaging*. It is evidently much
less clear that the violation of Reflection is an absurdity, compared to
making a promise while announcing the lack of intention to keep it. To
begin, perhaps we can first consider the violation in case of full
belief. Suppose I am invited to the flat earth society meeting tomorrow
that features an extreme persuasive speaker for the flat earth theory.
Knowing that I am always easily swayed by impressive rhetoric, I assert
that

\textgreater{} - The earth is spherical but I expect to believe in a
flat earth tomorrow.

Am I sabotaging myself? The point is that if I am willing to assert
fully that the earth is spherical now, I should be able to stand by my
assertion in the future. If I know I will have some perfectly good
reasons to change my mind about it, then I really should not make that
assertion, since I know I will not be able to uphold it. Analogously, if
I make a promise today, it is implied that I will keep the promise
tomorrow, and a promise shouldn't keep considered as successful if I
know perfectly well that I cannot keep my it.

Furthermore, if I am committed in holding my belief in a spherical
earth, then I should simply avoid going to the meeting due to my
irrational weakness to rhetorics, in which case I do not expect to
believe in flat earth tomorrow. Analogously, if I made a promise to
someone that I shall never drink alcohol again, I am sabotaging myself
by intentionally putting myself in a situation that will cause my
promise to be broken.

The idea, then, is that making an assertion puts the agent under an
obligation to defend and rationally cultivate the proposition being
asserted. This makes enough sense for full belief, but there is a gap in
carrying this analysis over to degrees of belief. He clearly wants to
extend this reasoning to degrees of belief, so there must be a practical
difference between asserting my degree of belief for \(P\) to be 0.3 and
0.7.

Van Fraassen uses betting behavior and Dutch book arguments to fill this
gap.{[}@beliefwill 244{]} The idea is that asserting a judgment of
probability requires me, quite literally, to put money where my mouth
is, and the money involved should be directly proportional to my degrees
of belief. This means that Reflection implies that what I think my
willingness will be in the future should be my willingness to bet now.
Van Fraassen shows that violating in Reflection will lead to the
susceptibility to a so-called Dutch book, which is a set of bets that
will lead to a guaranteed loss for anyone who accepts it. A Dutch book
*argument* is aimed to demonstrate that the vulnerability to Dutch books
a sign of incoherence and, therefore, irrationality. A Dutch book
argument can be made in support of Reflection by showing that by
violating this principle, one is opening oneself to being "Dutchbooked".

More specifically, the argument for Reflection requires a *Diachronic*
Dutch book, which involves a Dutch book *strategy* to offer the agent
bets that would be fair to the agent at the time, but the acceptance of
them will ultimately lead to a loss to the agent. The trick is to ask
the agent to bet on her opinion about what her future opinion about
\(E\) will be, in addition to offering bets on her opinion about \(E\)
itself. If the agent gives an answer that violates Reflection, then the
bookie will be able to make a Dutch book against her, by offering bets
that are fair to her according to her credences at the time. This is
supposed to show that violating Reflection is an act of self-sabotage.
The Dutch book argument will be elaborated with technical details in the
next subsection. It can be skipped without loss of continuity.

\#\# Dutchbook Argument for Reflection

A Dutch book involves a set of bets that will lead to a guaranteed loss
for anyone who accepts it. A Dutch book *argument* is aimed to
demonstrate that the vulnerability to Dutch books a sign of incoherence
and, therefore, irrationality. A Dutch book argument can be made in
support of Reflection by showing that by violating this principle, one
is opening oneself to being "Dutchbooked". More specifically, the
argument for Reflection requires a *Diachronic* Dutch book, which
involves a book with a strategy to offer the agent bets that would be
fair to the agent at the time, but the acceptance of them will
ultimately lead to a loss to the agent. The trick is to ask the agent to
bet on her opinion about what her future opinion about \(E\) will be, in
addition to offering bets on her opinion about \(E\) itself. If the
agent gives an answer that violates Reflection, then the bookie will be
able to offer a Dutch book against her.

Initially van Fraasseen uses a Dutch book argument to argue for the
special Reflection principle.{[}@beliefwill 244{]} However, he has come
to downplay its importance.{[}@beliefuly 12{]} This is partly due to the
decision-theoretic assumptions needed for a Dutch book argument to
succeed, especially on the simplistic model of the agent's willingness
to accept bets.\^{}{[}@joycenonprag{]} Nevertheless, it is still useful
illustration on how the violation of Reflection can lead to irrational
behavior.

Suppose the Duke basketball team is playing against UNC tonight at 8pm.
It is currently 1pm. Your friend asks you now for your subjective
probability 4 hours later that you will be willing to bet on Duke
winning at odds 2:1. For the sake of clarity, let us define these
propositions:

\(D\): Duke will win at 8pm.

\(B_{5}\): at \(5\)pm, P(D) = 1/3.

Upon reflection, I respond that

\[P(B_5) = 0.4\]

Note that \(P(B_5) = 0.4\) is just a simpler way to write
\(P(p_5(D)=1/3) = 0.4\). That is, currently, there is a probability of
\(0.4\) that in four hours, my credence for Duke winning will be
\(1/3\). Now suppose my friend elicits yet another subjective
probability from me. This time, she would like to know my personal
probability for the eventuality that Duke loses and I come believe at
5pm that their probability to win is \(1/3\). In other words, what is
the probability that \((\neg D \wedge B_{5})\)? Suppose I respond that

\[P(\neg D \wedge B_{5} ) = 0.3\]

From this, \(P(\neg D|B_5)\) is derivable:

\[\begin{aligned}
P(\neg D|B_5) &= \frac{P(\neg D \wedge B_5)}{P(B_5)}= \frac{0.3}{0.4}=0.75\end{aligned}\]

And \(P(D|B_5) = 1 - 0.75 = 0.25\). Recall that the current \(t\) is 1,
so \(B_5\) is essentially the same as \(p_{1+4}(D) = 1/3\)---four hours
later, I will come to believe that \(P(D)=1/3\). This means that I have
violated the Reflection, for

\[P(D|p_{5}(D) = 1/3)=0.25 \neq 1/3\]

Now, with this information, my friend then stages a Dutchbook strategy
against me with the following bets:

\textbar{} Bet \textbar{}Condition \textbar{}Reward \textbar{} Cost
\textbar{}
\textbar{}---\textbar{}---\textbar{}---\textbar{}--:\textbar{}
\textbar{} 1 \textbar{} \((\neg D \wedge B_5)\) \textbar{} 1 \textbar{}
\((1)P(\neg D \wedge B_5) =0.3\) \textbar{} \textbar{} 2 \textbar{}
\(\neg B_5\)\textbar{} 0.75 \textbar{} \((0.75)P(B_5)=0.45\) \textbar{}
\textbar{} 3 \textbar{} \(B_5\) \textbar{} 0.083 \textbar{}
\((0.083)P(B_5) = 0.03\) \textbar{}

The trick is that, in order to devise a Dutchbook against me, the reward
for bet 2 has to be \(P(\neg D | B_5)\), for bet 3 it has to be
\(P(\neg D | B_5)\) minus my subjective probability of \(P(\neg D)\) at
5pm, which is \(0.75-2/3= 0.083\). Since the costs for these bets were
calculated using expected utility, I should regard all of them as being
fair. All three bets cost me \(0.78\) in total. Now, at 5pm, there are
two possible outcomes:

1. I do not come to believe that \(P(D) = 1/3\): I win bet 2, but lost 1
and 3. This leads to a net loss of \(-0.78 + 0.75 = -0.03\). 2. I come
to believe that \(P(D) = 1/3\). I get \(0.083\) for winning bet 3. Now
bet 1 is now contingent on whether or not \(\neg D\). My friend now
offers me \(2/3\) to buy back that bet, which is fair in my light. I
sell that bet, which renders the result of the game irrelevant. In this
case, I have a net loss of \(-0.78+0.083+2/3 = -0.03\).

My initial probability assignment then has rendered me vulnerable to
Dutch books, because I have failed to follow the Reflection Principle.
To see how, consider the situation if I had obeyed Reflection. As
before, suppose that \(P(B_5)\) is 0.4. When my friend asks for my value
for \(P(\neg D \wedge B_5)\), if I had followed Reflection, I would have
realized that \(P(D|B_5)=1/3\). So, assuming independence,
\[\begin{aligned}
P(\neg D \wedge B_5) &= P(\neg D |B_5)\times P(B_5)\\
&= (1-1/3) \times 0.4\\
&= 0.27\end{aligned}\]

So this means that my pre-Reflection respond---\(0.3\)---was \(0.03\)
higher than it should be, had I followed Reflection, and this
discrepancy is exactly how much I was sure to lose due to being
Dutchbooked.

\textbar{} Bet \textbar{}Condition \textbar{}Reward \textbar{} Cost
\textbar{}
\textbar{}---\textbar{}---\textbar{}---\textbar{}--:\textbar{}
\textbar{} 1 \textbar{} \((\neg D \wedge B_5)\) \textbar{} 1 \textbar{}
\((1)P(\neg D \wedge B_5) =0.27\) \textbar{} \textbar{} 2 \textbar{}
\(\neg (p_{5}(D) = 1/3)\)\textbar{} 0.675 \textbar{}
\((0.75)P(B_5)=0.27\) \textbar{} \textbar{} 3 \textbar{}
\((p_{5} (D)= 1/3)\) \textbar{} 0.008 \textbar{}
\((0.008)P(B_5) = 0.003\) \textbar{}

\#\# Disanalogy Between Reflection and Speech Acts

However, if Reflection is indeed a normative principle of rationality,
there ought to be reasons to think about it independent of monetary
loss. Dutch book arguments rely on specific and unrealistic assumptions
about our betting behavior. Many have raised questions about the
reliance on Dutch book arguments. Even van Fraassen himself has
distanced himself from the argument.{[}@beliefuly 12{]}

The key to understanding Reflection intuitively is that it pertains to
the rationality of one's epistemic policies and procedures regarding
revising opinions. To begin, note that what Reflection asks is that our
current opinions should be constrained by what we currently *consider*
to be our future opinions. The idea is that, as a rational agent, I
should see my future opinions as the consequence of my adhering to my
current standard of rationality. If I have good reasons to think that it
is rational for my future self to hold such an opinion, it should be
good enough for my current self *now*.

Thus, consider van Fraassen's remark that

{[}the{]} violation of this Principle is a symptom, within the current
epistemic state, of a deeper defect: that the person holding this
opinion cannot regard him or herself as following a rational policy for
opinion change.{[}@beliefuly 17{]}

An interpretation of this somewhat cryptic is this: that my future self
will epistemically superior is a normative point: rationality requires
us to cultivate and maintain our opinions over time. Putting this
another way, I am suggesting that Reflection Principle at least applies
when a certain *all things being equal* clause is satisfied. In
particular, "all things being equal" must include the requirement that
in the time between I am committed to uphold and fulfill the same
standard of rationality, so that my future self will do at least as well
as I am now. For a simple example, suppose that, upon reflection, I
conclude that my future self, with life experience I do not have now,
will find my current spending habit quite irresponsible. If I could
conceive thinking *that* in the future, my rational course of action
*now* to take heed of my future self and revise my spending habits.

Consider van Fraassen's example of a meteorologist Piero.{[}@beliefuly
15{]} Suppose Piero announces his forecast for the day at 8 a.m. every
morning, and that he calculates the probability of rain for the next day
based on his total evidence at 6 p.m. every night. If at 6 p.m. he is
confident that, perhaps based on historical data, he will likely to see
evidence at midnight that will drastically change his current
prediction, he should base his opinion what his future self at midnight
*would* have based on his data now, and what he confidently thinks his
future self *would* have.

\textless{}!-- The purpose of this chapter is to defend the Reflection
Principle by developing a pragmatist reading of it. In particular, I
argue that Reflection must be understood in the context of abduction. My
contention is that many puzzles about Reflection will be resolved by
understanding how the commitment entailed by the making an epistemic
judgment is highly sensitive to the specific context of inquiry. My
largely Peircean analysis will also highlight the problem of van
Fraassen's Jamesian defense of Reflection. --\textgreater{}

These two examples demonstrate the two senses in which my future self
could be considered as worthy of my deference: my future self could make
better judgments and my future self could also have more
information.{[}@elgadisagreement 481{]}

For instance, consider the well-known counterexamples to Reflection.
They often involve cases in which I expect myself to make worse
epistemic judgments: in the future, I might lose information, and I
might be worse at making judgments. A prominent example of information
loss is that one may reasonably anticipate future memory loss, so it
would be reasonable not to defer to one's future opinion, thereby
violating Reflection.{[}@twoprinciplesofbayesian 138-141{]} The basic
idea is that it is not unreasonable to refrain from relying on future
opinions when you are certain that in the future you will have forgotten
some crucial information. To use the mundane example from the
literature: we often forget what we ate one year ago today, so it is
reasonable to expect that one year later that I will forget what I eat
now, but it does not mean that I should defer to my future self by
concluding that I do not know what I ate today.

David Christensen has provided a well-known example for violating
Reflection due to anticipated impaired judgments.{[}@cleverbookies
234-237{]} He asks us to consider a person \(B\) who has taken a state
of mind altering drag that causes one to believe strongly that she could
fly. Suppose \(B\) is considering her probability of being to fly right
after taking the drug but before it has taken effect. She knows in a few
minutes she will believe strongly that she could fly, but it would make
sense to violate Reflection here.

\textless{}!-- force of norm is needed --\textgreater{}

What these counterexamples show, I think, is that Reflection is
extremely context-sensitive: in general, we are pretty forgiving in
people's epistemic failure, due to our limited capacity. Thus, there is
a crucial disanalogy between making an epistemic judgment and promising.
Failing to discharge the obligation incurred from making a promise often
leads to the loss of credibility, and this is why the promiser has the
incentive to keep the promise (assuming that she cares about her
credibility). The promiser's aversion to the loss of credibility is also
why the promisee can be justified in taking the utterance as a genuine
expression of the promiser's sincerity---no one would take a
pathological lair's promise seriously, since credibility is no longer an
issue. The social practice of making a promise runs on the currency of
credibility.

Is there a similar institution for judgments of probability? To answer
affirmatively, we need to locate a social convention that penalize the
violation of Reflection. In general, however, I do *not* have to put
money where my mouth is. Contrary to van Fraassen's claim, I do not
think making a probabilistic judgment *in general* is like making a
promise. There is a clear social convention in how the norms for
promising are governed via an economy of credibility, but socially we
usually do not hold assertions of probability as being a genuine
expression of intention to consistently maintain the opinion asserted.

The close connection between degrees of belief and the willingness to
bet are well-established institution but idealized assumptions that
makes sense in specific decision-theoretical analyses of, say, business
decisions. In these situation, we assume that a stakeholder will act in
accordance to the expected utility theory. But we know that actual human
beings often deviate from it.\^{}{[}@prospect{]} This is specifically a
problem for voluntarism, because its very thesis is that assertions of
degrees of belief are normative depends on the commitments and
obligations they supposedly entail.

Of course, voluntarism *does* work within the context of Dutch book
arguments, so if I were to play a game in which I am contractually
obligated to make a probabilistic judgment and accept fair bets. In such
a narrow context, I should obey Reflection, because I *will* incur a
sure loss if I didn't.

This suggests to me that Reflection is required only in contrived
settings that makes Dutch book arguments possible---I do not say this as
a criticism, but as a crucial insight to be developed. Epistemic
judgments are more context-dependent than making promises. Voluntarism
lacks the context-sensitivity required to understand the nature of
Reflection. Instead, I will suggest a reading based on the view of C. S.
Peirce's pragmatism, to which we shall now turn.

\#\# The Pragmatic Maxim

\#\#\# Operationalism and Counterfactual Context

Discussions of the Pragmatic Maxim often begin with Peirce's "How to
Make our Ideas Clear", as it contains perhaps the most well-known
articulation of the principle:

\textgreater{} Consider what effects, that might conceivably have
practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have.
Then, our conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of
the object. {[}@makeideasclear, p.266{]}

The Pragmatic Maxim, even on a limited reading, seems to suggest that
the meaning of a word is tied to some publicly perceivable phenomenon.
Thus, the Pragmatic Maxim seems to support a kind of *operationalism*,
which holds that the "practical bearings" mentioned above refers the
*causal effects* of the object denoted by the word.{[}@whatpragwas 43{]}
This operationalism is motivated by a commitment to define terms in a
way that is conducive to scientific inquiry. Many ideas handed down to
us by tradition do not naturally admit empirical investigation. Thus, we
should clarify them so that questions about them can be resolved by
appealing to evidence. {[}@hoover1994 292{]} The operationalist reading
of the Pragmatic Maxim emphasizes on Peirce's view on how we should
analyze our ideas in service of scientific endeavors.

The operationalist reading of the Pragmatic Maxim may sounds
suspiciously like the logical positivists' verificationism, which says
something along the lines of words owe their meanings entirely to
verifiable sense experience. However, this would be a misreading of the
maxim, as it does not say a concept is reduced to its actual effects;
instead, it states that concepts are delineated by the effects "that
might *conceivably* have practical bearing, we *conceive* the object of
conception to have". The distinction between the two is not verbal.
Peirce takes the full understanding of an object - insofar as all doubts
about it is eliminated, to require the knowledge of how just how it
behaved but also how it would behave in counterfactual situations.

Peirce's emphasis on counterfactuals can be understood as the
*context-sensitivity* of the conditions of success for the application
of concepts. Consider the classic discussion of the context-sensitivity
of counterfactual conditionals by Nelson
Goodman.{[}@goodmancounterfactual{]} A counterfactual conditional is a
proposition about the states of affair \(C\) that would follow, if the
antecedent of the conditional \(A\) were true. Goodman points out that a
small change of the content of the antecedent would change the
truth-condition of the conditional itself, in a way inconsistent with
how material conditionals behave in formal logic. Consider the following
is a property of the material conditional but not the counterfactual
conditional:

3. 'If \(A\), then \(B\)' implies 'if \(A\) and \(C\), then \(B\)'

This is because the conditional here is understood as \(A\) cannot be
true without \(B\) being true, so the presence of \(C\) ought not defeat
it. But counterfactual conditionals do not behave this way. Consider:

4. If the match had been struck, it would have been lighted. 5. If the
match had been wet and then struck, it would have been lighted.

Even though the former is true, the latter is not. The point is that
counterfactual conditionals like the above presuppose a certain context.
When I say that the match would have lighted if it was struck, I am
assuming that the person to whom I am speaking understood the context
relevant to this statement, and the match not being wet is one of them.
Thus, we are entitled to claim to have a understanding of the match's
lighting behavior, only when we have our ability to pinpoint the exact
context in which the counterfactual conditional is true.

Thus, while Peirce's operationalism ties our understanding of a concept
to its empirical effects, it does not buy into crude reductionism to the
strictly observable and the physical. For instance, Peirce says that the
point of the diamond example is not a metaphysical reduction of the
property of being hard into nothing but a list facts pertaining the
diamond being scratched, but an epistemological point about how
properties such as hardness can be probed through learning it *would*
behave under all conceivable scenario, including counterfactual ones.
{[}@CP, 5.453{]} Only then we are entitled to say that we have
thoroughly learned what the property of hardness is. Most important,
these facts and counterfacts are evidence *for* the existence of
abstract and theoretical entities, and not a reduction of them.

\#\#\# Inferentialism and the Context of Deliberate Conduct

It is clear that Peirce often intends the Pragmatic Maxim to be a
principle that guides our analysis of concepts in service of empirical
investigation. But in his later works, Peirce also expresses the
Pragmatic Maxim as a thesis about how we ought to understand the
normative implication of one's *acceptance* of a belief. This is the
*inferentialist* reading of the maxim, which interprets the term
"practical bearings" as *how concepts and beliefs bear on our practice*.
That is, the acceptance of a belief puts a constraint on the agent's
other beliefs and her actions {[}@whatpragwas, 44{]}. Christopher
Hookway's interpretation of the Pragmatic Maxim is an example of an
inferentialist reading:

\textgreater{} If I believe or assert a proposition, I commit myself to
the expectation that future experience will have a particular character.
If this expectation is disappointed, than I will probably have to
abandon the belief or withdraw the assertion. Clarification of a concept
using the pragmatist principle provides an account of just what
commitments I incur when I believe or assert a proposition in which the
concept is ascribed to something.{[}@hookway1 60{]}

Consider the following formulation of the Pragmatic Maxim from Peirce's
later work:

\textgreater{} {[}Pragmatism is{]} the maxim that the entire meaning and
significance of any conception lies in its conceivably practical
bearings, - not certainly altogether in consequences that would
influence our conduct so far as we can force our future circumstances
but which in conceivable circumstances would go to determine how *we
should deliberately act*, and how we should act in a practical way and
not merely how we should act as affirming or denying the conception to
be cleared up. {[}@essentialpeirce2, 145, my emphasis{]}

One striking difference between these formulations and the one from "How
to Make Our Ideas Clear" is emphasis on deliberative action and rational
conduct. "Deliberate conduct," Peirce further explains, is
"self-controlled conduct." {[}@essentialpeirce2, 348{]} The crucial idea
here is that since the meaning of a word manifests itself through its
causal and practical effects, a belief, which consists of the use of
these words, should have a practical effect on those who accepts the
belief. But the effect here is not one of a causal one, but a rational
one.

Thus when Peirce identifies belief as habits, he does not mean a blind
response to stimuli but a "deliberate, or self-controlled,
habit."{[}@CP, 5.480{]} What Peirce has in mind in particular is that
the accepting belief implies a rational constraint on the believer's
future conduct, for "future facts are the only facts we can, in a
measure, control", so this is what is meant by the idea that beliefs can
have rationally binding repercussions on our future
conduct.{[}@essentialpeirce2, 359{]}

Putting the two together, what emerges is a more nuanced interpretation
of Reflection: making a probabilistic judgment may imply a certain
commitment, such that I will have to act deliberately in a particular
way that I would not have otherwise. But this normative link is highly
contextual: just like the lighting of a match could fail if one of the
necessary conditions is not met. I will devote the rest of this chapter
into developing this by diving further into Peirce's philosophy.

\textless{}!-- In light of his inferentialist, Peirce's view on
assertion and judgment is highly relevant to our discussion of
Reflection and the constraint it imposes on our beliefs.
--\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- To begin, the two sides of the same coin, as he takes
judgment to be "no more than an assertion to
oneself."{[}@essentialpeirce2 140{]} --\textgreater{}

Peirce's view on the normative dimension of assertion is especially
relevant. According to Peirce, the assertion of a proposition entails a
normative commitment: "to assert a proposition is to make oneself
responsible for its truth."{[}@CP 5.543{]} The very idea of
responsibility has both the prospective and deliberative elements that
the inferentialist reading of the pragmatic maxim exploits: to undertake
the responsibility of task usually means the responsible party will
deliberatively carry out the task involved some time in the future.

Peirce also sees a link between asserting a proposition and the
willingness to bet: "Both are acts whereby the agent deliberately
subjects himself to evil consequences if a certain proposition is not
true."{[}@essentialpeirce2 140{]} The analogy Peirce is making here is
that the acceptance of a belief cannot be understood without appealing
to normative concepts such as commitment, intention, and responsibility:
to believe that \(p\) involves the expression of the agent's intention
to assume the responsibility of fulfilling the normative commitments
entailed by the belief. Betting is an instance of this: betting on \(p\)
being true means making a commitment to act a certain way if the
proposition were false: making the bet means the agent is now
responsible. For the bet to be genuine, the bettor must express her
intention to pay if she happens to lose the bet: she either loses money,
or, if she refuses to pay, loses credibility.

Peirce's view then anticipates and overlaps with van Fraassen's
voluntarism. What makes Peirce's view, I think, superior to voluntarism
is his recognition that the normative force of assertion is *context
dependent*. In Peirce's words, the "measure of assurance" implied by an
assertion is a function of the context in which it is asserted {[}@CP
4.54{]} An assertion in the court of law, for instance, presupposes a
high degree of assurance, and implies the responsibility on the
asserter's part to demonstrate its truth:

\textgreater{} If a man desires to assert anything very solemnly, he
takes such steps as will enable him to go before a magistrate or notary
and take a binding oath to it.... it would be *followed by very real
effects, in case the substance of what is asserted should be proved
untrue*... if a lie would not endanger the esteem in which the utterer
was held, nor otherwise be apt to entail such real effects he would
avoid, the interpreter would have no reason to believe the assertion
{[}@CP 5.546 my emphasis{]}

The crucial point here is that there is nothing magical about an
assertion in and of itself: to make an assertion count as a genuine
expression of the intention to assume the responsibility for the truth
of the asserted proposition, the speaker has to enter into a social
context in which the speaker's failure to fulfill this responsible will
lead to "very real effects", such as the risk of legal jeopardy.

Thus Peirce recognizes the subtle differences of context make a world of
difference in terms of the normative force implied by the assertion. For
instance,

\textgreater{}Nobody takes any positive stock in those conventional
utterances, such as "I am perfectly delighted to see you," upon whose
falsehood no punishment at all is visited. {[}@CP 5.546{]}

Thus, assertions made during "small talk" should not be interpreted in
an epistemically meaningful context, and thus are not subject to the
same standard of criticism as a serious assertion. This distinction is
helpful in defending Reflection against the somewhat strange
counterexamples. In the cases of memory loss, in many if not most social
contexts, it is often excusable or expected to be forgetful. Facts
pertaining what one had eaten in the past are rarely relevant in
situation where the speaker's intention will be called into question. On
the other hand, if a speaker is testifying in a court of law under oath,
she is expected to stand by any assertion that is made in future.
Inconsistency due to faulty memory is strictly regulated and punished
through the hearsay rule and cross-examination.{[}@forgetful 167{]}

\textless{}!-- This ingredient, the assuming of responsibility... must
be present in every genuine assertion. For clearly, every assertion
involves an effort to make the intended interpreter believe what is
asserted, to which end a reason for believing it must be furnished. But
if a lie would not endanger the esteem in which the utterer was held,
nor otherwise be apt to entail such real effects as he would avoid, the
interpreter would have no reason to believe the assertion.
--\textgreater{}

\#\# The Abductive Context of Inquiry

Peirce's pragmatism provides a helpful framework to see why rationality
of epistemic judgment cannot be totally captured in voluntarist terms.
James' and, by extension, van Fraassen's voluntarism is based on an
interpretation of the Pragmatic Maxim that, I want to suggest, leads to
a problematic interpretation of Reflection.

Peirce makes a very helpful remark in a letter to James, in response to
receiving a copy of *The Will to Believe*, a book dedicated to Peirce
himself.{[}@CP 8.250-251{]} Peirce points out that James has conflated
the crucial distinction between *provisionally* accepting a belief for
the sake of further inquiry, and accepting a belief without any
evidence. From Peirce's point of view, James has taken the general
lesson of the Pragmatic Maxim, that "everything is to be tested by its
practical result", to its logical extreme, that "mere action as brute
exercise of strength that is the purpose of all."{[}@CP 8.250{]}

The thought is that if the Pragmatic Maxim is interpreted as suggesting
that the rationality of the acceptance of beliefs and the application of
concepts is evaluated in terms of whether their practical implications
are satisfied, then one may conclude, as James does, that (some) beliefs
can be justified simply by virtue of committing into the mode of
behavior required by the belief. This is why the central argument in
*The Will to Believe* is that one's belief in God can be justified as
long as one is committed into acting *as if* God exists.

This feature is carried over to van Fraassen's voluntarism. The
analogous move here is the claim that if we treat reports of degrees of
beliefs as nothing but perfomative speech acts that subject the speaker
to making a commitment in standing by the assertion in proportional to
its degree, such as willingness to bet, then an epistemic judgment is
considered as rational so long as the agent's act in accordance to it in
the future. This is what Reflection is supposed to codify.

From a Peircean perspective, however, this is an incomplete picture of
our epistemic practice. The matter can be divided into two different
points. First, ampliative reasoning, i.e., extrapolation beyond what our
evidence says, can be justified in certain contexts. As is well known,
Peirce is responsible for distinction between abduction, deduction and
induction. Following Issac Levi, we can understand abduction, deduction,
and induction broadly not only as distinct types of *inferences*, and
but also different *tasks* involved in our practice of
inquiry.{[}@levibeware 281{]} Abduction concerns how the question of the
inquiry is *framed*, such as choosing the hypothesis for testing. Once a
framework for inquiry has been chosen, it is the task of deduction to
tease out the necessary consequences, such as sub-hypotheses, so that
the criteria for empirical adequacy are clear. *Induction* then takes
place by testing the hypothesis against the deliverance of experience.

What I shall argue below is that Reflection and voluntarism should be
understood in the context of *abduction*. My contention is that the
seemingly perplexing combination of the permissive rationality of
voluntarism and the normative constraint of Reflection makes sense as
part of the exploratory stage of inquiry, in which we have to make
decisions about our experimental commitment *before* having any evidence
at hand. I must, however, begin by addressing the thorny issue of
inference to the best explanation(IBE). This is essential, because (1)
contemporary philosophers of science often use abduction as a synonymy
of IBE, and (2) van Fraassen is well-known for arguing against any
attempt to incorporate IBE in the context of probabilistic reasoning. A
critical discussion of these issues will not only clarify the sense of
abduction needed for my position, but also dislodge in advance van
Fraassen's criticism.

\#\#\# Van Fraassen's Anti-Abductivism

For the sake of brevity, let us call *explanationism* the position
holding that inference to the best explanation(IBE) as an indispensable
rule of *inductive* inference. In its most naive form, IBE says that we
should infer that the hypothesis that best *explains* the evidence we
have is the one we should *accept*. Van Fraassen is well-known for
arguing against IBE in this non-probabilistic, form. In its most naively
powerful form---a view that van Fraassen does ascribe to some
philosophers---IBE can be construed as a solution to Hume's problem of
induction, which holds that there is no independent justification for
extrapolating inductively beyond the evidence we have. IBE gets us out
of this problems by giving justificatory force to explanatory virtues,
so that the best explanation is the one we *should* accept. Van Fraassen
attacks this position relentlessly. One often cited argument of his is
that we never pick the best explanation *simplicter*, but the best *out
of the explanations available to us*. Van Fraassen argues this is a
horrible justification for a belief, since for some reason we might only
have horrible explanations available to us, so 'our selection may well
be the best of a bad lot.' (143)

Van Fraassen suggests that the strongest recourse available the
supporters of IBE is *entrenchment*, which amounts to the repackaging
IBE into a rule that works well with Bayesianism. The more plausible way
to do this, according to van Fraassen, is to give explanatory virtues a
place in the revision of belief in light of new evidence:

\textgreater{} Combining the ideas of personal probability and living by
rules, the new rule of IBE would be a recipe for adjusting our personal
probabilities while respecting the *explanatory* (as well as predictive)
success of hypotheses.{[}@bvflaws 149{]}

Let's call this new rule 'probabilistic inference to the best
explanation' (PIBE), which entitles us to raise the probability of the
best explanation. For instance, consider Jerry Fodor's remarks in his
*The Mind Doesn't Work That Way*:

\textgreater{} {[}My{]} version {[}of IBE{]} claims that the explanation
that would, if true, provide the deepest understanding is the
explanation that is likeliest to be true. Such an account suggests a
really lovely explanation of our inferential practice itself, one that
links the search for truth and the search for understanding in a
fundamental way.

Van Fraassen, however, argues that this cannot do. To begin, if IBE is
to be harmonized with Bayesianism, it must not clash the Bayesian
procedure of belief revision, i.e., conditionalization, but van Fraassen
argues that this cannot be done without violating the Bayesian standard
of rationality. The problem again is Bayesianism's allergy to ampliative
reasoning: PIBE is ampliative, since explanatory virtues goes beyond
what is logically implied by our evidence, so it is incompatible with
the explicative nature of Bayes' theorem, since the posterior
probability is nothing but an arithmetic consequence of conditional
probability. This must mean that the PIBE is the rule that confers
'bonus' probability to a belief based on its explanatory virtue. This is
where PIBE conflicts with Bayesianism.

Van Fraassen uses a Dutch book argument against explanationism. The gist
of the argument is that an explanatioinst will violate
conditionalization when they raise the probability of the best
explanation. This leads to a guaranteed loss when the bookie offers bets
based on the explanationist's prior belief, and then based on the
explanationist's belief after *both* conditionalization and PIBE. A
simplified version of his argument is presented in the next subsection.
Readers uninterested in the technical details can skip it without loss
of continuity.

\#\#\# Van Fraassen's Dutch book argument against PIBE

Suppose we are interested in the bias of a certain coin, \(\theta\),
which indicates the probability of the coin landing on heads. Suppose we
know that there are 3 equally probable hypotheses: (A) \(\theta = 0.9\),
(B) \(\theta = 0.5\), and (C) \(\theta = 0.1\). Suppose our evidence
gathering process is described as follows: \(X_i = 1\) denotes 'the coin
has landed on heads on the \(i\) toss' and \(X_i = 0\) otherwise.
Suppose we have toss the coin 4 times, and they all landed on heads. So
the evidence \(E\) is \(\sum_{i=0}^4 X_i = 4\). The marginal probability
for \(E\) is:

\[P(E) = P(A)P(E|A)+P(B)P(E|B)+P(C)P(E|C) = 0.24\]

Using Bayes' theorem, the posterior probabilities are:
\(P(A|E) = 0.9129\), \(P(B|E) = 0.0869\), and \(P(C|E) = 0.0001\). So
far so good---4 consecutive heads favors the hypothesis that the coin is
bias toward heads, which is what conditionalization is showing us. Where
does PIBE comes in, then? Van Fraassen asserts that an argument from
PIBE would be as follows: out of the three hypotheses, \(A\) best
*explains* why we see nothing but heads: it's because it's highly
biased. So what PIBE should do is to recommend the redistribution of the
probabilities so that \(P(A)\) would be even higher. Suppose we raise
\(P(A)\) to \(0.999\). This amounts to giving the best explanation a
bonus of \(0.086\) in probability. To accommodate this, we can lower the
probabilities of the other hypotheses accordingly. For instance:
\(P(A) = 0.999\), \(P(B) = 0.00086\), and \(P(C) = 0.00014\). So we have
extrapolated ampliatively beyond what the evidence tells us by using
PIBE.

This line of reasoning, however, flies in the face of the Bayesian
notion of *coherence*, since it renders one subject toa set of bets that
ensures whoever takes these bets a loss. Imagine that we are back at the
beginning before we tossed 4 heads. Before tossing the coin for four
times, we were offered the following set of bets. Let \(E\) again be
'the coin is tossed 4 times and they are all heads' and \(H\) be the
\(X_5=1\), that is, 'the fifth toss turns up heads'.

1. \$10,000 if \(E\) and \(\neg H\). 2. \$1300 if \(\neg E\). 3. \$300
if \(E\).

Now, we can calculate the values of these bets based on our prior
probabilities:

1. Bet 1:
\((10000)  \frac{0.8^4(0.2) + 0.5^5 + 0.2^4(0.8)}{3} = 323.16\) 2. Bet
2: \((1300)  (1-0.158) = 988.56\) 3. Bet 3: \((300)  0.158 = 71.87\)

So these bets would be worth \$1383.6 in total. Suppose we bought these
bets for exactly that much from a bookie, who then proceeded to toss the
coin for 4 times. Either \(E\) is true or it is false. Suppose it's
false---at least one toss landed on tails. In this case, we would have
won bet 2 but lost 1 and 3. We would receive \$1300 but this would still
lead to a total loss of \(-1383.6+1300=-83.6\).

On the other hand, suppose \(E\)---all tosses turned up heads. We would
receive \$300 per bet 3, and now bet 1 would depend entirely on the
fifth toss. Now, van Fraassen asks, what should our degree of belief for
\(\neg H\), that the fifth toss will land on tails? Recall that we have
used PIBE to give a bonus to the most explanatory hypothesis, \(A\),
which effectively has raised the marginal probability of \(H\) to
\(0.9\). At this point, bet 1 is now worth
\((10000)P(\neg H) = (10000)0.1 = 1000\). Suppose the bookie offers us
exactly \$1000 to buy this bet back. We would regard it as fair and
accept his offer. In this scenario, we end up with
\(-1383.6+300+1000 = -83.6\)---we incur exactly the same loss as we
would if \(E\) were false.

\#\#\# Abduction, Predesignation, and Reflection

Van Fraassen's argument is often misunderstood. When explanationists
cite van Fraassen's anti-IBE argument, it may sound as though van
Fraassen takes Bayesianism as the correct position by fiat, so that any
position that contradicts it is *de facto* an inviable one. Indeed, this
is how many explanationists read him. Take Lipton for instance:

\textgreater{} In its simplest form, the threatening argument says that
Bayesianism is right, so Inference to the Best Explanation must be
wrong.{[}@lipton 104{]}

But given our discussion of voluntarism, this assessment of the
situation is not quite right, at least in the original context of the
argument. The voluntarist argument is not that it is irrational to use
conditionalization or IBE, but that (1) they are not rationally
compelling in and of themselves, and (2) repacking IBE as some
probabilistic rule is inconsistent with Bayesian conditionalization.

Many explanationists, including Lipon, who misread van Fraassen's
argument attempts to challenge van Fraassen's negative argument heads
on, by defending that both conditionalization and PIBE are rationally
compelling. By taking this approach, explanationists have to argue for
the legitimacy of PIBE within the stringent requirement of Bayesianism.
To do so, they must give an account of how explanation can influence
probabilities without subjecting oneself to a Dutchbook Argument. The
strategy here is a mixture of neutralizing PIBE so that it will not get
in the way of conditionalization, and providing incentives for Bayesians
to adopt it by amplifying or emphasizing PIBE in areas where
conditionalization comes up short. The result of this approach is often
an unsavory stew, since it has to dance around neutralizing and
strengthening PIBE without either trivializing it or over-promising what
IBE can do.

Alternatively, we could take the path of less resistance: instead of
hamstringing explanatory reasoning in order to accommodate the stringent
requirement of Bayesian rationality, we should exploit the liberating
nature of voluntarism. Like explanationist, I think that explanatory
reasoning is an indispensable element in our probabilistic and
statistical reasoning, but I also agree with van Fraassen that PIBE
cannot be made consistent with conditionalization. I advocate a largely
Peircean position that can accomplish this.

In Peirce's ideas we can find a view that agrees with explanationism
that abduction is indispensable to induction but also with van
Fraassen's voluntarist point that the acceptance of a hypothesis have
practical repercussions on the inquirer's future behaviors. The crucial
point is that making an epistemic commitment is not "a brute exercise of
strength"---instead such a commitment can satisfy the aim of inquiry
only if it is situated with framework that allows *vindication* if the
hypothesis withstands the tribunal of experience, and *correction* if it
fails.

The permissiveness of voluntaristic conception of rationality is
characteristic of ampliative reasoning that occur with in the context of
Peirce's conception of abduction. At this stage of inquiry, different
hypotheses can be introduced to the logical space of reasons for
non-evidential reasons, hence abduction is "the first starting of a
hypothesis and the entertaining of it."{[}@CP, 6.525{]} For instance,
hypothesis that in any way explain the phenomenon under investigation is
permissible. In his early years, Peirce uses the following syllogistic
schema to illustrate one example of abduction:

1. The surprising fact, C, is observed; 2. But if A were true, C would
be a matter of course. 3. Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is
true.{[}@CP, 5.189{]}

\textless{}!-- absuction is important --\textgreater{} In this schema,
\(C\) is the observed *fact* that calls for a hypothesis that would, in
Peirce's words, *rationalize* it. {[}@essentialpeirce2 107{]} Peirce
sometimes refers to \(A\) as an *abductive suggestion* that follows the
perception of the surprising fact.{[}@essentialpeirce2 227{]} They are
*possible* accounts for the phenomenon observed, and are not presented
as true proposition, but hypotheses that we may accept provisionally for
the sake of further testing. Thus, in the context of abduction,
ampliative inference is justified, because the goal here is the
introduction of hypotheses, without which neither induction nor
deduction can proceed. Hence Peirce holds that the role of abduction is
paramount to the growth of knowledge, as it is "the only logical
operation which introduces new ideas".{[}@essentialpeirce2 216{]} This
is why explanatoriness is a relevant factor in abduction: During
abduction, explanatory virtue is clearly a relevant consideration, for
the construction of a framework pertains to the choice of a hypothesis
to be tested, and how much the hypothesis, *if true*, explains would
provide ground for making the hypothesis a genuine contender.

We see a crucial difference in the Peircean's conception of abduction
and the explanationist conception. Peirce clearly sees no conceptual
connection between a hypothesis's explanatoriness and its probability.
Abductive reasoning is a creative but risky process:

\textgreater{}The abductive suggestion comes to us like a flash. It is
an act of insight, although of extremely infallible insight.
{[}@essentialpeirce2 227{]}

\textgreater{}...abduction is, after all, nothing but guessing.{[}@CP
7.219{]}

Therefore, in the abductive context, an agent can accept a hypothesis
that is not only improbable but also with low explanatory values, if the
hypothesis is *informative*. For instance, we may choose to accept an
improbable hypothesis provisionally if we know, through deduction, that
the confirmation or rejection of the hypothesis will necessarily rule
out many others. Peirce also suggests that a hypothesis may be adopted
for pure economical reasons. So, unlike the explanationists, Peirce sees
no reason to think that an explanation that explains is one that is also
probable. Explanatory virtue is but one of many relevant factors in
abduction.

Peirce's view on abductive rationality, then, *is* voluntarism:
epistemic judgments made in the abductive context is not justified by
probability or truth, but the deliberate adherence to the commitments
implied by the judgment asserted. This is made clearly by Peirce here:

\textgreater{} An Abduction is a method of forming a general prediction
without any positive assurance that it will succeed either in the
special case or usually, its justification being that it is the only
possible hope of regulating our future conduct rationally.{[}@CP
2.270{]}

As discussed, the notion of deliberate conduct is central to Peirce
pragmatism, and to understand the role it plays in relation to
abduction, we must also understand Peirce's statistical understanding of
inquiry.

As Peirce sees it, the validity of inductive reasoning is strictly
regulated by the statistical structure deductively by the commitments
she makes in the abductive context. This means that the epistemic
judgments made during abduction cannot be changed during the inductive
context, otherwise the inference would be invalidated altogether. This
can be seen as a requirement to hold an experimental version Reflection:
I have to stand by my decision to provisionally accept the abduced
hypothesis, before my obligation is satisfactory discharged at the very
end of the experiment. I cannot, for instance, rationally change my
hypothesis to fit the data better in the middle of the data-gathering
process. Peirce codifies this requirement as *the rule of
predesignation*, which he calls a necessary guiding principle of
induction. {[}@essentialpeirce2 48{]}

The idea is that the inquirer's commitments, intentions, and judgments
all make contribution to the context in which the inductive inference is
made. This is why the decisions the agent makes during the abductive
context constitute the experimental framework for the testing of the
chosen hypothesis, and the rule of predeisgnation imposes a rational
constraint on the inquirer's opinions during the inductive context. In
particular, the decision the agent makes during abductive phase requires
the agent to stand by these commitments during the inductive stage of
the inquiry. This is how Peirce explains it:

\textgreater{} If in sampling any class, say the M's, we first decide
what the character P is for which we propose to sample that class, and
also how many instances we propose to draw, *our inference is really
made before these latter are drawn*, that the proportion of P's in the
whole class is probably about the same as among the instances that are
to be drawn, and the only thing we have to do is to draw them and
observe the ratio. {[}@probableinference, 434{]}

In other words, making statistical inference presupposes a commitment to
the assumptions implied by what it means to carry out random sampling.
In particular, the responsibility must be taken up prior to the sampling
itself, by committing into the stipulations in the experimental setup,
such as the statistical hypothesis to be tested and the length of the
trial. Hence, Peirce says that once those details have been settled, the
inquirer must take the responsibility of carrying it out exactly as she
described; otherwise, the inference is illegitimate.

\textgreater{} But suppose we were to draw our inferences without the
predesignation of the character P; then we might in every case find some
recondite character in which those instances would all agree. That, by
the exercise of sufficient ingenuity, we should be sure to be able to do
this, even if not a single other object of the class M possessed that
character, is a matter of demonstration.

Using van Fraassen's voluntaristic terminology, such an action is
*self-sabotaging*, because if the length of the trial is unfixed, the
investigator can keep on sampling until they find a sample that supports
her hypothesis. The sampling here would not be random, and the inference
would not be valid. After the investigator has made her experimental
commitments clear, as Peirce says, "the only thing we have to do is to
draw them and observe the ratio." This is why Peirce insists that
rationality *requires* what he calls deliberate conduct---I must stand
by the decisions I made in abduction, which is to faithfully carry out
the sampling process dictated by the probability model, and accept or
reject the hypothesis based on the criteria I specified. If stop the
experiment earlier and later than I should have or change my hypothesis
after the sample has drawn, the inference would be invalid. This is why
statistical inference to Peirce is a rational conduct that requires the
inquirer's ability to act deliberately.

There is an important parallel between Reflection and Predesignation: I
commit myself to the epistemic judgment about aspects of certain future
states of affair. The crucial difference is that Predesignation
specifies how one could *discharge* the obligation implied by this
commitment, by seeing how the asserted judgment fares against the result
of the experiment.

\textless{}!-- This dynamic between abduction, deduction, and induction
is best illustrated with a concrete example. The next subsection
contains a technical example that can be skipped without loss of
continuity. --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- \#\# Conclusion

Through Reflection, I have in chapter introduced a way in which
pragmatism can inform probabilist epistemology. We saw that van
Fraassen's voluntarism X I have also discussion how Peirce's notion of
abduction can escape van Fraassen's critique of the explanationism. In
the last section, I constructed a reading of Peirce's philosophy, which
provides a framework that explains the role of Reflection in abduction,
but also respect the explanationist intuition about the important
explanatory values. --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!--

Peirce, on the other hand, insists that hypotheses chosen in the
abductive context have direct repercussions on one's experimental
responsibility during deduction and induction. Peirce's rule of
predesignation is c

To begin, there is clearly a sense in which Peirce's understanding
deduction is very close to its modern understanding, since Peirce
understands deduction to be reasoning about the necessary consequences
between propositions, so a derivation in, say, predicate logic and
theorem proving would be considered as deduction by Peirce. X The most
prominent example is the role of necessary connections play in the
testing of a hypothesis. When we decide whether or not we should reject
a hypothesis, we often have to consider whether experience accords with
what necessarily follows from the hypothesis. For instance, suppose we
are examining the hypothesis that the coin in front of us is fair. We
know that, from probability theory, for a random variable with binary
outcomes---success or failure, for instance---the probability of getting
\(k\) success out of \(n\) trials, given the probability of a single
success, is

\[{n \choose k} p^k (1-p)^{n-k}\]

Thus, suppose we have \(n=5\) tosses, and \(p=0.5\). A necessary
consequence is that the probability of of \(x = 0\) toss turning up
heads is \({5 \choose 0} 0.5^0 (1-0.5)^{5-0} = 0.03125\).

--\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- Induction, on the other hand, involves inference that is
neither necessary nor justified by the relation between propositions,
but by its reliability and conduciveness to knowledge. --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- VS BAYESIAN: JUST DEDUCTION --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- VS JAMES: JUST ABDUCTION --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- descriptive vs normative: definitti

--\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- \#\# Conclusion

The first problem is that Reflection Principle does not speak to the
rationality of making epistemic judgment by balancing competing values.

The second problem is that voluntarism does not provide a picture of how
epistemic responsibility can be discharged. --\textgreater{}

\# Deliberation and the Problem of Optional Stopping

In the last chapter, I tried to incorporate the Peircean notion of
abduction into a broadly probabilist framework by means of van
Fraasseen's voluntarism. There is an important synergy between the
voluntarist idea that epistemic judgments are speech acts with normative
implications and Peirce's conception of rationality as deliberate
conducts. More important is Peirce's rich notion of abduction, which
goes beyond the mere appeal to explanatory values, supplies the context
sensitivity needed to understand the Reflection Principle.

The main lesson, I suggested, is that the normative force that regulates
epistemic commitments incurred by making a probabilistic judgment cannot
be understood without the *context* in which it is made. An assertion,
as Peirce suggests, has no normative force unless the assertion is
underwritten by an epistemic practice that incentivizes the agent to
stand by the obligations imposed upon her. Dutch book scenarios, though
in general unrealistic, can be seen as one such context, since in the
setup the agent is stipulated to make bets and revise her degrees of
belief in a specific way.

In this chapter, I endeavor to develop this position in the specific
context of inductive and statistical inference. Essentially, I am
defending the following slogan:

\textgreater{} The deliberativist thesis: inductive inference must be
interpreted in light of its deliberative framework.

A deliberative framework is the context of inquiry chosen in the
abductive stage: the selection of the hypothesis to be provisionally
accepted and probed, the probabilistic judgments deduced from the
statistical model used to represent the phenomenon of interest, and
experimental procedure to practically engage in these assumptions. The
term "deliberative" is designed capture Peirce's idea that accepting a
belief or making a judgment means one is supposed to conduct oneself in
a deliberate way, in accordance to the relevant inferential commitments.
It also contains the voluntaristic element, in that many elements of the
framework are the matter of the will---they justified by virtue of being
decision upon.

I will defend and develop the deliberativist thesis by a critical
examining of the problem of optional stopping, one of the many points of
contention in the Bayesian-frequentist debate. This gist of the problem
is that the freqeuntist conception of statistical evidence is dependent
on the intentions of the experimenters, such that the experimenter may
manipulate the evidence just by changing her intention to stop the
sampling. This, Bayesians argue, is detrimental to the validity of
frequentist inference. Instead, many Bayesians hold that the evidential
import of data can be fully captured by what is called the *likelihood
function*, which is impervious to the effects of the agent's intentions.
This is called *the Likelihood Principle*.

My goal of this purpose is to resist the Likelihood Principle by
addressing the problem of optional stopping. This is done not by arguing
against the idea that an agent's intention can change the evidence her
experiment can produce, since this would amount to a rejection of th
deliberativist thesis, but to argue that optional stopping also affects
Bayesian methods, so the deliberativist thesis holds even in the
Bayesian context.

In section 3.1, I will give a historical presentation of the problem of
optional stopping, by giving an overview of how it was used by
parapsychologists to cook up evidence for the phenomenon of
"extra-sensory perception(ESP)". In section 3.2, I will sharpen
Bayesians' rationale that agent-intentions are to be blamed, and why
they think this is a critical flaw of frequentism. In section 3.3,
however, I will explain how the same problem can apply to Bayesan
reasoning. The last the section, 3.4, I examine a potential response to
my argument by considering a proof about *the value of evidence* given
by Ramsey and Savage.

\#\# ESP and Optional Stopping

On April 24th, 1940, the mathematician W. Feller delivered a lecture on
his critique of the statistical method used in parapsychological
research at a Duke mathematic seminar. At that point, J. B. Rhine was
spearheading Duke's parapsychology research: to make parapsychology
scientifically respectable, Rhine believed, statistical evidence must be
used to support the conclusions he wishes to demonstrate. Feller points
out, however, many results of these experiments involve on a trick
called ``optional stopping'', which is used to abuse statistics to get
their desired outcome. Feller argued that such an experimental practice
invalidates the result of parapsychological studies. Feller's specific
criticism against parapsychology, however, became the starting pointing
of a general critique of Frequentist statistical methods, often
mobilized by Bayesian statisticians. The argument is that, while the
parapsychologists no doubt had questionable experimental practice, it is
a flaw of the Frequentist methods they employed. The problem, Bayesians
argue, is that a statistical conclusion ought not be influenced by
extra-statistical concerns such as when the experimenter decides to
stop.

\textless{}!-- The problem of optional stopping, then, is a crucial
piece of puzzle regarding the dispute between statisticians from the
Frequentist and Bayesian traditions. In this chapter, I aim to examine
the this problem in an epistemological context. I argue that, in the
epistemological context, the problem of optional stopping is also a
problem for Bayesians. In particular,

My secondary goal in this chapter is to use my analysis of optional
stopping as an occasion to support a position I wish to defend called
deliberativism, which holds that probabilistic or statistical evidence
must be interpret in light of what I call a deliberative stance, in
which the investigator's concerns and values all come under
consideration in shaping the experimental structure that underlies the
production of the evidence in question. --\textgreater{} One of the
phenomena parapsychologists had claimed to have found statistical
evidence is extrasensory perception(ESP), i.e., that some people can
perceive certain facts without the use of any of the five senses. How
can such a claim be examined experimentally and statistically?

One often used experimental setup for testing ESP is an activity called
``card guessing'' using the so-called Zener cards, after Karl Zener, the
Duke psychologist who invented them. A Zener card can have one of 5
unique symbols. A typical deck of Zener cards contain 5 cards for each
symbol. A trial of this experiment typically involves a subject was
being repeatedly asked to guess the face of a randomly chosen card,
while the investigator would note the actual face of the card and the
subject's answer. After each trial, the subject's sequence would then
compared to the observed result, and a score would be calculated based
on the number of correct guesses.

Of course, one could achieve a high score by chance: no one would think
I had ESP if I successfully had predicted the outcome of a coin flip,
because we know that, no matter what my prediction is, I would still
have a \(0.5\) probability of getting it right. But what if I guessed 10
correctly the result of 10 consecutive tosses? The probability of that
is \(0.5^{10} = 0.001\). We are much more inclined to say that I have
some sort ability, because it would have been an extraordinary
coincidence if I got it right purely by chance. This is the sort of
statistical arguments that Rhine and his followers tried to make. Their
contention is that if a subject can obtain a score that is too
extraordinary to be explained by just chance, then we have statistical
evidence for the person's ESP ability. In statistics, the probability of
an outcome, assuming that it is by chance, is called the \(p-value\).

Since there are 5 faces, a subject has the probability of \(0.2\) of
getting it right just by guessing alone, so someone with ESP should do
better than that. This is how "better" can be statistically explicated:
suppose a trial with 100 attempts has been carried out on a subject. If
the subject is just guessing, then we would expect that she would get
around 20 cards right. In fact, using the binomial distribution, we can
ascertain that out of 100 cards, there is a probability of \(0.944\)
that the subject can get 26 or less correct guesses. Conversely, the
probability that a guesser can get 27 or more cards right is pretty low:
the p value is \(0.056\).

Of course, this critical point entirely depends on how long the trial
is. In other words, we say that 27 is the cutoff, only because we
already decided that the trial involves 100 guesses. For 500 guesses,
for instance, there is a probability of 0.95 to randomly guess 115 cards
correctly. So, using the same standard, scores higher than 115 would be
considered as statistical evidence for the hypothesis the subject
actually has ESP.

One study claims to have discovered just that: a parapsychologist
carried out the card guessing experiment on 141 patients in a mental
hospital. The study claims to have found statistical evidence that
manic-depressive individuals have demonstrated the ability to detect the
face of a card through extrasensory means. It is said that these
subjects consistently scored higher than chance. For instance, consider
patient A. M. who got 118 hits out of 500 attempts. As discussed, it
would seem that, assuming A. M. was just guessing, it would have been an
extraordinary coincidence that he scored 18 higher than normally
expected. In fact, the p value---the probability for an outcome or
better like this to happen by chance---is \(0.027\), which is quite
improbable. Does this constitute evidence for ESP?

Feller argues that results such as this are spurious, because the
parapsychologists practiced *optional stopping*. The idea is that many
of these experiments have no set number of attempts, and often either an
experiment could stop exactly when a favorable result is obtained. For
instance, an experiment could be terminated early in order preserve a
significant result. A. M., for instance, has made 500 attempts. His test
was then much shorter than his peers, many of who made more than 1000
guesses.

To make this point more concrete, we can take advantage of modern
statistical computing: we can simulate experiments with similar stopping
rulesX. The difference here is that for the simulation we *know* that
the participants are just guessing. So, if we can still force
significance using optional stopping, then there is a good reason to
doubt the supposed evidence for ESP.

Consider an experiment with the following procedure: the experimenter
will randomly draw a Zener card out a shuffle deck, with replacement.
She will then ask the subject to guess the card, and record the result.
For each subject, she will stop under one of these two conditions: 1.
The result has reached significance: the probability of the current
outcome is less than \(0.05\). 2. 2000 guesses have been made. The
experimenter will then move on to the next subject, until she has
examined 1000 subjects. All subjects are guessing, so their probability
of success is exactly \(0.2\).

Here's a summary of the result, after simulating testing 1000 subjects:

1. 371 out 1000 outcomes has reached significance. (\(p-value<0.05\)) 2.
The p-value got as low as \(0.017\). 3. On average, significant results
stopped at the 294th attempt. The median is 85. 4. It would seem that
successful tests tended to stop early, though this is not always the
case. One test reached significant at the 1999th attempt.

Thus, using optional stopping, we can easily find 'evidence' for ESP if
we look long enough.

Even though Feller was primarily concerned with showing that many of the
findings in parapsychology is the result of shoddy experimental
practice, these problems would later be used by Bayesians as examples as
to why Frequentism is flawed. The basic argument is that
parapsychologists could cheat in way they did, because of the way in
which the probabilities are computed and interpreted, and these problems
are supposed to avoidable within the framework of Bayesian statistics.
In the next section, we will review this argument.

\#\# Likelihood and Counterfactual Probabilities

From the problem of optional stopping then, what follows? From the
Bayesian perspective, it suggests both a criticism of Frequentism and an
argument for Bayesian statistics. The criticism is that the
experimenter's intention to stop could directly influence the
significance of the result is because of frequentists' reliance of
*counterfactual probabilities*. The defense is that Bayesian methods do
not require counterfactual probabilities, and therefore immune to the
argument from intention, and, therefore, is preferable. I propose to
first examine these two lines of thought, and then transitions to the
epistemological issues.

The implicit information here is that \(0.04\) is relative to what
*would have* happened, if the the null hypothesis *were* true. To see
what this means, note that there were 4 ways an experiment with two
attempts could have turned out. Let \(H\) to "Hit" and \(M\) be "Miss".
The 4 possibilities are: \[MM \quad MH \quad HM \quad HH\] But to get
the probabilities needed, we will need to make at least one additional
assumption: we need to assume that the

because they are their respective probabilities are:
\[P(M\wedge M)=0.8^2=0.64 \quad P(M\wedge H)=0.2(0.8)=0.16\]
\[P(H \wedge M)=0.16 \quad P(H \wedge H)=0.04\]

The point Bayesians want to establish is that the p-values cannot be
seen as an unadulterated summaries of the observed evidence, since any
p-value is laden with assumptions about what might have happened, based
on some hypothesized parameters. In our comparison between the
likelihood function and sampling distribution, we have already touched
on the role of counterfactual probabilities in frequentist inferences.
According to many Bayesians, this is a one fundamental disagreement
between the two camps. Lindley says:

\textgreater{} ...orthodox {[}frequentist{]} theory typically considers
results that might have occurred in the experiment but did not... what
has what might have happened, but did not, got to do with inferences
from the experiment?

Jaynes shares this sentiment:

\textgreater{} The question of how often a given situation would arise
is utterly irrelevant to the question how we should reason when it does
arise. I don't know how many times this simple fact will have to be
pointed out before statisticians of "frequentist" persuasions will take
note of it.

\textless{}!-- Their derision notwithstanding, it is not clear why
counterfactual considerations *should* be irrelevant. In everyday
reasoning, reasoning about the meaning of evidence based on
counterfactual is often accepted. Consider a detective who is
determining if a gunshot victim's death was a murder of a suicide.
Suppose she's examining the evidential import of the gun involved and
found only the victim's fingerprints. She could reason counterfactually:

- If the victim were murdered, the gun would have the murderer's
fingerprints.

From there, she might conclude that it is a case of suicide. Examples
like this one is not hard to come by, so the irrelevance of
counterfactuals is not something that should be taken for granted.
--\textgreater{}

For many Bayesians, the problem of optional stopping is seen as a
decisive case against the frequentism and for Bayesianism. In
particular, Bayesians believe that the sort of problem caused by
optional stopping is due to the violation of the Likelihood
Principle(LP), which states, roughly, that everything one can learn from
an experiment about an hypothesis can be obtained by calculating the
probability of the *actual* observation conditional on that hypothesis.
The reliance on *only* actual observations, as opposed to counterfactual
ones, renders LP to be in a fundamental conflict with frequentism. I. J.
Good says the following that exemplifies this point well:

\textgreater{} Given the likelihood, the inferences that can be drawn
from the observations would, for example, be unaffected if the
statistician arbitrarily and falsely claimed that he had a train to
catch, although he really had decided to stop sampling because his
favorite hypothesis was ahead of the game. (This might cause you to
distrust the statistician, but if you believe his observations, this
distrust would be immaterial.) On the other hand, the "Fisherian"
tail-area method for significance testing violates the likelihood
principle because the statistician who is prepared to pretend he has a
train to catch (optional stopping of sampling) can reach arbitrarily
high significance levels, given enough time, even when the null
hypothesis is true.

The use of the phrase 'likelihood' here is technical: it refers to the
likelihood function \(p(x_{1:n}|\theta)\), which is the probability of
observations \(X_1...X_n\) conditional on the parameter of interest,
such as the probability of guessing a card correctly. The crucial point
here is that the likelihood function holds the actual observations to be
fixed, while the hypothesized parameter is variable. This is different
than the frequentist way, in which the *hypothesis* is fixed, and asks
what the probabilities of different possible outcomes are, if the
hypothesis were true. This is why Bayesians repeatedly chide
frequentists for caring about data that we could have but didn't.
Likelihood function, the Bayesian way of summarizing data, does not take
into consideration of counterfactual probabilities at all.

TABLE

At this point, the debate becomes quite messy, since Bayesians tend to
run the problem of optional stopping, and the likelihood principle
together, as Good has clearly done in the passage above. The assumption
is that optional stopping cannot occur once Bayesian methods are
adopted. However, the problem of optional stopping is perfectly
intelligible on frequentist ground: it draws out undesirable
consequences based on assumptions accepted by frequentists. The
introduction of LP, however, begs the question against the frequentists.
If all the fundamental frequentist methods violate LP, why would any
frequentist accept this principle? My suspicious is that they probably
won't.

However, what also motivates Bayesians to see LP as being indispensable
is that it allows statistical inferences to be made without caring
anything about the intentions of the experimenters. This attitude can be
summarized as *the argument from intention*, which says that what
optional stopping shows is that Frequentist's reliance on counterfactual
probabilities renders their result vulnerable to manipulation, because
the experimenter's intention *alone* can radically alter the import of
the evidence.

\#\# Intentions and Self-Sabotage Redux

Consider a simple illustration concerning the bias of a coin discussed
by Lindley and Phillips. {[}@lindleybern 113-114{]} Suppose I was told
that the coin was tossed 12 times but out of those times 3 turned up
heads. The argument from intention says that, unless you know what goes
on inside the tosser mind when she decided to stop the tossing, there is
no way to know what the evidence says. And, depending on the answer she
gives, the evidential import of the result can alter drastically. For
instance, consider these stopping rules:

1. Stop after 12 tosses 2. After 3 heads.

The argument is that depending on which of the above rules the
parapsychologist used, the significance of the data will change, even if
the number of guesses and hits are the same. To begin, note that each
rule implies different impossibilities. For instance, if the
experimenter stops after 12 tosses, it is obviously impossible that the
test to last for more than 12 tosses, but it is possible for heads to
turn up as few as times and as many as 12 times. On the other hand, if
the test terminates after 3 heads, the only possible number of heads is
3, but the experiment can take as many tosses as needed to reach that
goal. So each different stopping rule implies different counterfactuals,
and leading to different sets of probabilities.

So Bayesians have an important point here: intentions are influencing
the statistical result through counterfactual probabilities, but, unless
there are reasons to think accounting for intentions is somehow
inherently bad, this *supports* the deliberativist thesis, since what it
asserts is precisely that what agents intend to do to alter her
epistemic state is part of what deliberation is about, and therefore
must be considered in the interpretation of her data.

First, consider the rule that says stop after \(n=12\) tosses, so using
frequentist method means that we have to consider the probability of all
possible outcomes: that is, 0-12 heads. since a hit could occur at
different trials. We know that, from probability theory, for a random
variable with binary outcomes---success or failure, for instance---the
probability of getting \(k\) success out of \(n\) trials, given the
probability of a single success, is

\[{n \choose x} p^x (1-p)^{n-x}\]

Let's say a "success" is a coin toss that lands on heads. To carry out
an investigation, we have to make two decisions: the first is to choose
a hypothesis about \(p\) to be tested. In a binomial process with
\(n=12\), assuming that the coin's probability of landing on heads is
\(0.5\), what is the probability that she gets 3 or less heads? That is,
let \(Y=\sum_i^{12} X_i\), where \(X_i = 1\) if the coin lands on heads,
and 0 otherwise, then

\[P(Y \leq 3 ) =  \sum_{i=0}^{3} {12 \choose i} (0.5)^i (0.5)^{12-i} = 0.07\]

This is generally considered an insignificant result, but what if the
intention was to stop whenever the subject has gotten 3 heads? To model
this, we would have to use the so-called negative binomial distribution,
which models the probability making \(r\) failures before getting \(k\)
successes. In this case, the experimental question is in fact quite
different, since now we would consider the coin to be biased against
heads if it takes an abnormal large number of tosses possible. So the
statistical question is: what is the probability of the coin needing
\(12\) or more toss in order to get 3 heads? Using computers, we can
easily find this. Let \(X\) be the number of misses, so

\[P(X \geq 9) = 1 - P(X <9) = 1 - \sum_{i=0}^{8} {3+i-1 \choose i} (0.5)^3 (0.5)^{i} =0.03\]

This seems to be a much more significant result, but this is not the
complete picture. Given our discussion regarding abduction and
predesignation, the intention to stop's effect on statistical result in
fact strengthen the deliberativist position that inductive inference
must be understood against the background of an abductive context. The
stopping rule is one of those commitments that the agent needs to make
explicit prior the experiment, and changing it afterward is an act of
self-sabotage: it defeats the very purpose of trying to probe the
hypothesis accepted provisionally.

In the abductive context, it is true that there are decisions we are
free to make. There is no context-independent justification for the
choice of \(n\), which determine the probability of having \(k\)
successes. For instance, suppose we choose to toss the coin \(n=5\)
times, and that we decide on the hypothesis that \(p=0.5\). As Peirce
suggests, at this point I enjoy the voluntarist freedom of making any
epistemic judgment based on extra-evidential concerns: for instance, I
may only have time to throw the coin for 5 times. Just as breaking a
promise will cost my credibility, I have to specify how my obligation
can be resolved, in case my judgment turns out to be false. For
instance, a decision has to be made regarding how much deviation from my
own prediction is acceptable. This is where deduction takes over.

These decisions allow us to make deductions about the experimental
commitments that follow as necessary consequences from these parameters.
For instance, based on the model chosen, and that \(p=0.5\) and \(n=5\),
I can deduce that

\[P(X=0) = {5 \choose 0} 0.5^0 (1-0.5)^{5-0} = 0.031\]

\[P(X\leq 1) = \sum_{i=0}^1 {5 \choose i } 0.5^i (1-0.5)^{5-i} = 0.19\]

These are the probabilities that follow deductively from the decisions I
have been in the abductive context. I made what Peirce would call a
*probable deduction*, which involves the deductive derivation of
probabilistic judgments based a model with known parameters. Even though
the conclusion of probable deduction is probabilistic, the *connection*
between the conclusion and its premises is
necessary.{[}@probableinference 417{]} They signify the epistemic
commitments I incur: if I accept provisionally the hypothesis that
\(p=0.5\) for \(n=5\), then I am committed to the probabilistic judgment
that the probability of tossing the coin five times without heads is
0.031.\^{}{[}Of course, I could be dissatisfied by the result of the
deduction, in which case I could revise my experimental commitment
abductively. I put this issue aside now, as the dynamic between
abduction and deduction is the focus on chapter 4.{]}

In any case, the point of the rule of predesignation is that once I have
made those decisions, *I cannot revise them once I have started flipping
the coin*. I cannot, for instance, stop the experiment after getting two
tails in a row, only because I am interested in proving that the coin is
unfair. During abduction, I have made the commitment to stop the
experiment after 5 tosses---changing this intention changes the whole
inferential context altogether, and stopping early is an act of
self-sabotage. This can be shown by pointing out that the probability
getting two tails out of two throws is \(0.5^2 = 0.25\), which is much
higher than \(0.031\). We will discussion this problem with a greater
detail in the next chapter.

A crucial element in James' voluntarism is that the responsibility
implied by the inquirer's acceptance of a hypothesis includes the
incurring the risk of errors in rejecting the alternative hypotheses. To
get a grip on this risk, the agent must ask: what would happen, had I
accepted the wrong hypothesis? This style of thinking is already present
in Pascal's wager, in which he asks us to imagine the scenarios such as
mistakenly rejecting the existence of God or mistakenly accepting it.

This aspect of voluntarism is largely unaccounted for by the Reflection
Principle, but this Peircean framework I am describing can accommodate
by calculating so-called *error probabilities*. For instance, suppose I
follow the standard practice and declare that I will reject the
hypothesis that \(p=0.5\), when the sample I collect has a less than the
probability of \(0.05\) of occurrence. This would mean that I am
committed into rejecting my hypothesis if I get no heads after tossing
the coin 5 times. But what if the coin is actually biased, but not
insofar as it would not even once land on heads? The probability of
making such an error can be calculated *ex ante* deductively. For
instance, suppose the reality is that the coin is biased such that
\(p=0.2\). But if this were true, I have a high probability of keeping
my provisionally accepted hypothesis by mistake, because

\[P(X > 0) = 1 - P(X=0) = 1 - {5 \choose 0} 0.8^5 = 0.67\]

This means that by accepting \(p=0.5\), I am incurring a pretty high
risk of error: if \(p=0.2\), there is a 0.67 probability that I will
come to error. The closer \(p\) is to \(0.5\), the more likely it is
that I will come to accept \(p=0.5\) erroneously. If \(p=0.3\), for
instance, this error probability is \(0.83\). Of course, incurring the
risk of error matters only if I care about finding out the truth. If all
I care about is to confirm my hypothesis, incurring the high risk of
error will not be counted as genuinely accepting an obligation---it
would be similar to promising to eat lunch today, which I would do
regardless of the promise anyway. This is why Peirce insists that
validity of inductive inference depends on

\textgreater{}first, a sense that we do not know something, second, a
desire to know it, and third, an effort,---implying a willingness to
labor,---for the sake of seeing how the truth may really
be.{[}@essentialpeirce2 48{]}

Thus, we can understand the problem of optional stopping as a special
case of *self-sabotage*: that is to preemptively sabotaging one's
possibility of "seeing how the truth may really be". Of course, this is
a self-sabotage only if the agent cares about the truth at all.

Returning to Lindley's case of getting 3 heads of 12 tosses. He is
entirely correct in pointing out that under different stopping rules
would have an impact on what will counted as statistical significance,
even if the numerical result will be the same, but from the
deliberativist standpoint, these stopping rules imply different sets of
epistemic commitments.

If the agent intends to stop after 12 trials, then to aim for a level of
statistical significance \(\alpha\) at \(0.05\), she would have to
commit to reject the fair coin hypothesis if she gets 2 or less heads.
The repercussion is that, had the coin been only slightly biased against
landing on heads, it is unlikely that she would be able to find the
truth. For instance, the probability getting 2 or less heads, if
\(p=0.4\), is only \(0.08\). For \(p=0.3\), it's \(0.25\). In other
words, if the coin were only slightly biased, it would unlikely to
produce the result that is detectable within this particular
deliberative framework. Of course, there is nothing sacred about
\(\alpha= 0.05\), notwithstanding the preaching of introductory
statistics textbooks. If the agent's intention is to determine if the
coin is only slightly biased, she is free to adjust \(\alpha\) so that
her risk of error, had \(p\) been \(0.4\), is smaller. Even though, if
\(p=0.5\), the probability of getting 3 or less heads out of 12 at
\(0.07\) does not quite reach the textbook standard of statistical
significance, it nevertheless would be much better at detecting
\(p=0.4\), since the probability of the same outcome occurring would be
\(0.23\). Not perfect, but this is the kind of decision one makes during
the abductive context.

None of the above considerations hold if we had changed the stopping
rule to "stop after 3 heads." The deliberative framework would be
entirely different. To begin, we are now adjudicating, not the
probabilities of error between different numbers of heads landed, but
the number of tails we would tolerate before 3 heads is seen. We saw
that having to see 9 tails before 3 heads is a statistically significant
enough reason to reject the hypothesis that the coin is fair. What this
overlooks, however, is that a biased coin can often get 3 heads before 9
tails; because, probabilities from a negative binomial distribution tend
to be "front-loaded". For instance, with a coin that is half as unlikely
to land on heads than tails, that is, \(p=0.25\), the probability to see
8 or less tails before 3 heads is

\[P(X \leq 8) =  \sum_{i=0}^{8} {3+i-1 \choose i} (0.25)^3 (0.75)^{i} =0.55\]

So looking strictly at the different p-values is a somewhat misleading
way to look at the matter. Mayo and Spanos summarizes the frequentist
response as follows:

\textgreater{} {[}the argument from intention{]} would seem to beg the
question against the error statistical {[}i.e., frequentist{]}
methodology which has perfectly objective ways to pick up on the effect
of stopping rules: far from intentions ``locked up in the scientist's
head'' (as critics allege), the manner of generating the data alter
error probabilities...{[}@errorstat 186{]}

Of course, a defense of intentions in frequentism is not an argument
*for* the relevance of intention in Bayesianism. Furthermore, Bayesians
like Lindley without a doubt was aware of these basic statistical facts
from power analysis. What prompted their stance is the assumption that
Bayesian methods are impervious to the problem of optional stopping,
since the likelihood function is not affected by intentions, or other
facts in the deliberative framework. In the next section, I will
demonstrate that optional stopping can also affect results obtained
using Bayesian methods, so I am attacking the very idea that Bayesians
cannot ignore the effects of deliberation.

\textless{}!-- negative bin --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- dnbinom(500-110,110,.2) --\textgreater{} \textless{}!--
This, I think, in fact makes their position weaker; because, optional
stopping and the argument from intention are perfectly intelligible on
frequentist ground: they both simply draw out some undesirable
consequences based on assumptions accepted by frequentists. The
introduction of LP, however, begs the question against the frequentists.
If frequentist methods violate LP, why would any frequentist accept LP?
The answer, I think, is clear that they won't. From an argumentative
perspective, the focus is shifted from optional stopping and intentions,
which *are* problems for frequentists, to a defense of LP, which is a
burden for Bayesians who accept it. This is, for the most part, how Mayo
and Spanos addresses this argument. --\textgreater{}

\#\# Bayesian Optional Stopping

As pointed out by Deborah Mayo, the statistician Peter Armitage was the
first to point out that some Bayesian procedures can and do get the same
result as frequentist statistics, so this opens the door to the idea
that cheating by optional stopping can be replicated as well. As before,
I will first spell out the technical details in a semi-formal fashion,
and then try to illustrate the problem via simulation.

To begin, we have to gain an understanding of what Bayesian inference is
like. Naturally, it begins with Bayes' theorem. Consider some hypothesis
or belief \(H\) and some evidence \(E\).

\[P(H|E) = \frac{P(H)P(E|H)}{P(E)}\]

In its most basic form, Bayes' theorem has 3 components: The
unconditional probability of \(H\), \(P(H)\) represents the probability
we would assign to the belief before the evidence, which, as we have
discussed, is represent by the likelihood \(P(E|H)\)---the probability
of the evidence, given the hypothesis is true. The third ingredient is
\(P(E)\), the unconditional probability of \(E\). To see how this works,
consider an example with Zener cards. To begin, suppose that we have a
subject in front of us, and we have to determine she has ESP. Let's say
she has 2 out of 2 correct answers. How should we learn from this data?
What follows is the standard Bayesian story.

For the sake of simplicity, for now let us suppose that there are only
two options: either the subject is randomly guessing, or she has ESP,
which entails a perfect reliability. In other words, we have two
hypotheses. Let \(\theta\) be the subject of probability of getting a
hit, and

1. \(H_0: \theta = 0.2\) 2. \(H_1: \theta = 1\)

These are sometimes called "chance hypotheses." Now let \(E_i\) refers
to the result of the \(i\)th guess, and it equals \(1\) for a hit, and
\(0\) otherwise. So let \(E = \sum_i^2 E_i =  E_1 + E_2 = 2\). This
means that we have the following likelihoods:

3. \(P(E|H_0) = 0.2^2=0.04\) 4. \(P(E|H_1) = 1\)

Recall that the likelihood principle says that this contains all the
information we need to know about the experiment. Now, suppose you are
not a believer of ESP, so you are almost certain---say, \(99\%\)
sure---that the subject will not do better than chance. We then have the
priors needed:

5. \(P(H_0) = 0.99\) 6. \(P(H_1) = 0.01\)

From the above, we can derive
\[P(E_i = 1) = P(H_0)P(E_i=1|H_0) + P(H_1)P(E_i=1|H_1) = 0.99(0.04)+0.01(1) = 0.0496\]

Using Bayes' theorem, we can then revise our belief about the subject's
ability to guess cards, producing the following *posterior
probabilities*:

\[P(H_0|E) = \frac{0.99(0.04)}{0.0496} = 0.8\]
\[P(H_1|E) = \frac{0.01(1)}{0.0496} = 0.2\]

Having seen two successful attempts in a row, we have warmed up to the
idea that the subject might have ESP. An intuitive way to look at this
Bayesian procedure is that the posterior probability is a promise
between my existing belief---my priors---and evidence, which is
summarized by the likelihoods, according to the LP.

To make my point, these basic Bayesian statistical procedures are
sufficient, though things will get somewhat messy when we consider more
realistic cases. For instance, it is arbitrary to consider only two
chance hypotheses. A more applicable model would be to consider all
possible values of \(\theta\) in \([0,1]\). For that we have to use some
of the well-established distributions. I will use again use simulation
to demonstrate the effect of optional stopping, but to do so I need to
how the situation will be modeled.

Now, recall that optional stopping from a frequentist context entails
falsely rejecting null hypothesis by sampling over and over again until
obtaining an outcome with a probability low enough on the null
hypothesis to secure statistical significance. The Bayesian parallel is
to keep on sampling so we can have \(E\) such that \(P(H_0|E) < x\)
where \(x\) is a value the optional stopper is committed into believing.
Note that now we are talking about the probability of the hypothesis
itself, whereas in the frequentist setting we were concerned with the
probability of the observation.

Fortunately, since there are only two outcomes, a Zener card-type
experiment can be modeled as a Beta-Bernoulli process, where the Beta
distribution would model our degrees of belief about a subject's
*propensity* and the Bernoulli distribution would represent the Zener
card experiment itself. What these models represent is usually clear
enough in a practical and statistical setting, but since we are in a
philosophical setting, we need to be clearer about what we mean by
degrees of belief and propensity, so we know what are actually being
modeled.

I suggest we follow the views of D. V. Lindley and David Lewis. Lindley
argues that probability is a relation between the agent and the world,
so when we say something about \(P(\theta=0.5)\), \(\theta\) must be
something about the world.{[}@lindleybern, p.115{]} In our case, this
has to be an objective feature of the coin, hence I have been careful in
describing \(\theta\) as the subject's propensity or reliability, which
is a property in the world: even though \(\theta\) looks like a
probability, in the Bayesian statistical framework we can just treat it
as another parameter being modeled, not unlike \(\mu\) or \(\sigma\) for
normal distributions, so a subject's extra-perceptual reliability is a
objective feature of the world in a way no different than the fact that
the average age of Duke students is an objective fact. Our degrees of
beliefs about them, however, are subjective.

Of course, this does not fully answer the question: what is this
objective feature? Lindley's answer is that it is the propensity of the
coin to land heads. Skyrms recommends a similar
interpretation{[}@causationandconditional, p.707{]} This recommendation
is compatible with, if not the same as, the influential view presented
by David Lewis, who adopts Carnap's pluralistic stance on probability.
Carnap thinks there are at least two concepts of probability:
\(probability_1\), which is an epistemic concept about degrees of
confirmation and \(probability_2\), which refers the empirical concept
of long-run limiting frequencies. {[}@carnapprob, 517{]} Lewis suggests
that we should instead interpret the epistemic concept as credence or
degree of belief and the empirical concept as chance or
propensity.{[}@lewisguide{]} So, following Lewis, we can interpret
\(P(\theta=0.5)=x\) to be "the degree for the belief that the chance of
heads is 0.5 is \(x\)." For the sake of consistency, I will refer to
subjective probability just as *credence* or *degrees of belief*, and
objective probability as *chance* or *propensity*.

We can now spell out some formal details of the simulation.

\textless{}!-- Now these random variables can be modeled as follows:
--\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- \[\theta \sim Beta(\alpha, \beta)\]
\[X_1,...X_i \sim Bern(\theta)\] --\textgreater{} Early on, we
considered a case in which only two possible hypotheses are considered:
either the subject is guessing randomly(\(H_0:\theta = 0.2\)) or the
subject has perfect reliability(\(H_1:\theta = 1\)). This makes our
epistemic attitude relatively easy to summarize, since all we have to do
is to assign a value to our credence to each of the two hypotheses. As
we noted, this is an oversimplification, since there is no reason to
arbitrarily restrict ourselves to just two hypotheses. This, however,
means that we need a way to deal with the fact that there are infinitely
many possible hypotheses between 0 and 1, which is why we need the beta
distribution.

The beta distribution is really nothing but a function that, based on
two parameters we provide, describes our epistemic attitudes toward
\(\theta\).\^{}{[}The distribution has the form:
\(\frac{\Gamma(\alpha + \beta)}{\Gamma(\alpha)\Gamma(\beta)}x^{\alpha -1} (1-x)^{\beta -1}\)
where the parameters \(\alpha,\beta > 0\) and
\(0\leq \theta \leq 1\)(\(\theta\) is the random variable being modeled)
{]} The two parameters, \(\alpha>0\) and \(\beta>0\), can be thought of
as, in our context, our past experience about \(\theta\), with
\(\alpha\) representing past successes and \(\beta\) past failures. For
instance, if we set \(\alpha = \beta = 1\), it should say that we are
extremely ambivalent about \(\theta\). In fact, it is equivalent to
having a uniform distribution over \([0,1]\)---this means that I am
utterly indifference regarding any value for \(\theta\).

Our data-collection will be modeled using the binomial distribution. Let
\(x\) be the number of success, \(n\) the number of trials, and
\(\theta\) the propensity of success:

\[f(x|\theta, n) = {n\choose k} \theta^k (1-\theta)^{(n-k)}\]

This is the same distribution we used as the sampling distribution in
the frequentist case, but recall that for Bayesian analysis we will no
longer concern ourselves with counterfactual probabilities, instead, we
are treating \(\theta\) as the function of the \(x\), the number of
success which is constant.

\textless{}!-- figure uniform --\textgreater{}

Fortunately, as soon as this is laid out, the rest is very simple,
thanks to the fact that the beta distribution is a *conjugate prior* for
the binomial distribution. Essentially, what this mean is just that if
we plug the beta and binomial distributions into Bayes' theorem to get a
posterior distribution

\[p(\theta|x) = \frac{p(\theta)p(x|\theta)}{\int p(\theta)p(x|\theta)}\]

the result is simply another beta distribution with parameters
\(\alpha =\alpha + x\) and \(\beta = \beta + n - x\). In words, to learn
from experience, all we have to do is to add the number of successes to
\(\alpha\) and the number of failures to \(\beta\). Another useful thing
to keep in mind is that the beta distribution's expected value has the
form:

\[E(\theta) = \frac{\alpha}{\alpha + \beta}\]

Now, because of conjugacy, the *posterior* expected value is simply:

\[E(\theta) = \frac{\alpha + k}{\alpha + \beta + n}\]

So, our experimental procedure is fairly simple: we pick an appropriate
set of parameters, and for each trial in which the subject is able to
guess the card correctly, we add 1 to \(\alpha\); otherwise, we add 1 to
\(\beta\). For example, consider again the case of a skeptic who
observed that a subject has made two correct guesses in a row. Since
prior the observation the skeptic does not believe that the subject
would do better than chance, she knows that

\[E(\theta) = \frac{\alpha}{\alpha + \beta} = \frac{1}{5}\]

There are various ways in which we can make this work mathematically,
but for now let's say \(\alpha = 2\) and \(\beta = 8\). Since the
subject has gotten 2 out of 2 correctly, the skeptic's posterior should
be the beta distribution with \(\alpha= 2+2=4\), while \(\beta\) remains
at 8.

Because we are using Bayesian methods, we can ask directly the
probability of \(\theta\) having certain values. A similar question we
can ask, then, *given* the evidence we have, what is the probability of
the subject's para-perceptual reliability is no better than randomly
guessing? In other words, what is the probability that \(\theta\) is
less than or equal to \(0.2\)? Using the cumulative distribution
function for the beta distribution using standard statistical software,
we can find out the prior and posterior values:

\[P(\theta \leq 0.2) = 0.56\] \[P(\theta \leq 0.2|\mathbf{X}) = 0.16\]

We can see that after witnessing the evidence, the skeptic's personal
probability for the belief that the subject is doing no better than
chance is lowered by quite a bit. The Bayesian version of optional
stopping is this: a Bayesian optional stopper can decide to stop
gathering more evidence as soon as the posterior is low enough. The idea
is that a committed enough optional stopper will eventually find
"evidence" for ESP, i.e., subjects with low posterior probability of
random guessing.

To demonstrate this, consider the follow procedure;

1. We will loop for \(n\) times for \(n\) subjects. a. For each subject
\(s\), we begin with a flat uniform distribution by setting
\(\alpha = \beta = 1\). b. A random sample \(x_i\) will be drawn from a
Bernoulli distribution, with \(\theta = 0.2\). c. Add 1 to \(\alpha\) if
\(x_i =1\); add 1 to \(\beta\) otherwise. d. Terminate if either (i)
\(P(\theta_s \leq 0.2|\mathbf{X})\) is less than threshold \(k\) or (ii)
the number of trial \(i\) has exceeded the maximum number \(m\).
Otherwise, return to step a with the same subject. 2. If \(n\) subjects
have been tested, terminate; else, return to step a with a new subject.

\textless{}!-- show result --\textgreater{}

One could argue that optional stopping could be prevented here by not
using the uniform prior. This is true: for instance, if, instead of
having \(\alpha = \beta = 1\) as parameters, we use something strongly
biased in favor of \(\theta = 0.2\), such as
\(\alpha = 10, \beta = 40\), it would be fairly difficult for the
optional stopper to game the result. But this seems to me a point *for*
deliberativism, not against it, because this is amount to saying
commitments and intentions matter by sneaking them in through the back
door of priors. Furthermore, what is stopping an optional stopper to
cheat even more by adopting a set of parameters that is biased *against*
\(\theta = 0.2\)? Of course, we would criticize anyone that adopts such
an experimental stance, but it would be made on the deliberativist
ground.

\textless{}!-- pdf cdf --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- !{[}Beta Distributions{]}(beta.png) --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- Intuitively, we can think of the first distribution as
representing your state of belief about the probability of getting a
head on the next flip. This distribution is plotted in Figure 1: note
that it is wholly flat, capturing the sort of judgement of indifference
that Keynes talks about. One finds no ground in thinking one probability
is more credible than another.

The second distribution can be seen as our state of belief after
witnessing 10 flips of the coin, and 5 turn up heads and 5 tails.
Naturally, the peak - the mode of the distribution - is at
\(\theta = 0.5\), which seems sensible, because it reflects the evidence
that exactly half of the samples are heads. But we can see that at this
stage we are quite uncertain about \(\theta\), evidenced by the width of
the distribution. While \(\theta = 0.5\) is the peak, there is a
substantial area covering \(\theta 0.55\) and \(\theta < 0.45\).

The third distribution, modeling the state of belief after one million
trials with half of them being heads, is intended to be an approximation
of Popper's ideal evidence scenario. The peak is again at \(0.5\), but
this plot has a noticeably narrower spread: we are much more confident
in our assessment that the coin has an equal propensity to land on heads
as tails. Also notice that at this stage, any value of \(\theta\) other
than \(0.5\) are practically impossible after receiving the ideal
evidence. This is in harmony with the MLE. --\textgreater{}

\#\# Is Optional Stopping Irrational From the Perspective of the Utility
Maximizer?

There is, however, a more substantive objection that requires a more
thorough exposition. An Orthodox Bayesian could argue that optional
stopping is an irrational practice, because from a Bayesian perspective
it is never rational to refuse evidence, because additional evidence
*always leads the increase in expected utility*. This is in fact a
result that has been proven in various occasions and forms by Frank
Ramsey, I. J. Good, and L. J. Savage.
{[}@ramseyvalue{]}{[}@goodtotalevidence{]}{[}@savage, sec 6.2{]}

Some context is helpful. In his *A Treatise in Probability*, J. M.
Keynes points out that subjectivists and expected utility theorists
often implicitly assume that we should always get more evidence.
Bernoulli, for instance, suggests that rationality demands the
utilization of all evidence available to us. This implies, Keynes
thinks, that it's always rational to get more evidence, but then it
raises another critical question about whether or not one could ever be
rational in refusing new evidence. {[}@keynes, p.84-85{]} If the answer
for the former question is positive, and the latter question negative,
then we have to conclude that rationality dictates us that we should
never stop looking for more evidence. This problem received little
attention, except by Ramsey in an unpublished note, until years later
Ayer raises the same question in response to Carnap's *Logical
Foundation of Probability*, in which Carnap essentially restates
Bernoulli's maxim as "the requirement of total evidence".

\textgreater{} *Requirement of total evidence*: in the application of
inductive logic to a given knowledge situation, the total evidence
available must be taken as basis for determining the degree of
confirmation.{[}@carnapprob, p.211{]}

Aver asks the Keynesian question: should "total evidence" include
relevant evidence that I do not yet have in possession?{[}@ayerpae,
p.56{]} The answer must be "yes", Ayer argues. If finding the truth
value of some proposition \(P\) could potentially sway the balance of my
evidence, then I should definitely acquire it. Thus the principle of
total evidence seems to suggest that I am also rationally compelled to
consider some evidence I do not yet have.

I. J. Good interprets Ayer's as questioning "why... we should bother to
make new observations." {[}@goodthinking, p.178{]} In the context of
optional stopping, this is particularly salient: if I already have the
result I want, why should I bother get more evidence?

\textless{}!-- But Ayer points out that this cannot be the whole
picture: taken as a rule of rationality, this means we should never stop
acquiring unless we are certain that we have acquired all available
evidence. This, however, assumes that we know what evidence is
available, but it could often be unrealistic to expect to know how much
evidence we *do not* currently have. --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- Ayer argues that this is only a symptom of a deeper
problem about logical nature of probability and its bearing on the
rationality of our evidential practice. The logical interpretation of
probability, held by both Carnap and Keynes, takes probability as a
logical relation between propositions, so within this picture, inductive
rationality is a matter of having the right degrees of belief between
premises and conclusion---this is analogous to the idea deductive
rationality is perceive correctly whether the conclusion follows
necessarily from the premises. --\textgreater{}

Ramsey, in an unpublished note, was the first one to address this
problem from a Bayesian perspective. Ramsey's argument is roughly that,
*if* we assume an agent to be a perfect Bayesian and that new
information does not cost anything, then she will never be no worse off
getting new evidence. In fact, she is guaranteed to be *better* off as
long as the new evidence will tell her something new. A perfect Bayesian
agent is someone who studiously updates her opinions based on Bayes'
rule and then act by choosing the action that maximize her expected
utility. Note that this assumes two things: first, for any decision
problem she faces, there is always going at least one course of action
that maximizes her expected utility, and second, as Skyrms points out,
this also implies that the agent knows that she will always *stays*
being perfectly Bayesian in the future. What we have here, then, is the
ideal Bayesian agent.

I will make use of an intuitive example rather than reproducing the
proof here.\^{}{[}This example is adapted from @leviweight{]} Suppose we
have three hypotheses about the content of an urn in front of us:

1. \(H_b\): 90 black balls and 10 white balls 2. \(H_w\): 10 white balls
and 90 black balls 3. \(H_n\): 50 white balls and 50 black balls.

Suppose we start by assuming \(P(H_b) = P(H_w) = P(H_n) = 1/3\)---we
could have some knowledge that assures us that these are the only three
possibilities. There is also a reward of \$1 for picking the correct
hypothesis. Our expected payoff for choosing each hypothesis would be
the same at \(1/3\). Nevertheless, we are allowed to sample with
replacement as many times as we wish. Should we get more evidence? Yes,
according to Ramsey, we should, and this can demonstrated in terms of an
expected utility analysis.

To begin, at this point, the probability of getting a black ball is the
same as getting a white ball. Let \(E_b\) be "a black ball is drawn" and
\(E_w\) for white balls. So:
\[P(E_b) = P(H_b)P(E_b|H_b) + P(H_w)P(E_b|H_w) + P(H_n)P(E_b|H_n)\]
\[=1/3(0.9)+1/3(0.1)+1/3(0.5)=0.5\] And \(P(E_w) = 1 - P(E_b) = 0.5\).
So, in the event of drawing a black ball from the urn, we would update
our belief like so:

\[P(H_b|E_b) = \frac{P(H_b)P(E_b|H_b)}{P(E_b)}=\frac{1/3(0.9)}{0.5} = 0.6\]

Similarly, applying the calculation on the other hypotheses, we get:
\[P(H_w|E_b) = 0.067\] \[P(H_n|E_b) = 0.333\] Similar argument can be
made by assuming \(E_w\), that is, a white ball is chosen. In that case
\(P(H_w|E_w) = 0.6\). If we were an ideal Bayesian agent, we should pick
\(H_b\) if \(E_b\), and pick \(H_w\) if \(E_w\). Since an ideal Bayesian
would choose the option that maximizes our expected utility, in either
case the expected value after drawing from the urn once is \(0.6\),
which is an improvement, since before drawing our expected utility is
\(1/3\) for all options. The net gain in expected utility would be
\(0.6 - 0.33 = 0.27\), is referred to as *the value of information* in
the decision theory literature.{[}@appliedstatdec p.89-90. For a more
digestible presentation see @winkler sec.6.3{]}

It turns out that we would be even better off if we were to draw from
the urn again. Suppose the first draw yields a black ball. So now we
have one piece of evidence in hand. Let us refer to our state of belief
after the first draw as \(H_b', E_b',..\) and so on. For instance,
\(P(H_b') = P(H_b|E_b)\) and \(P(E_b') = P(E_b'|E_b)\). One notable
change is that \(P(E_b') = 0.7132\) and \(P(E_w')=0.2868\). If we draw
again and get a black ball, this means:

\[P(H_b'|E_b') = 0.757\] \[P(H_w'|E_b') = 0.009\]
\[P(H_n'|E_b') = 0.233\]

If a white ball were to be drawn:

\[P(H_b'|E_w') = 0.21\] \[P(H_w'|E_w') = 0.21\] \[P(H_n'|E_w') = 0.58\]

Thus, if the second sample is a black ball, we would choose \(b\) since
it has the maximum expected utility at \(0.757\), and if we get a white
ball, we choose \(n\) with the expected value at \(0.58\). So, the
expected utility, if we were to draw from the urn again, is:
\(0.7132(0.757) + 0.2867(0.58) = 0.706\), which is an improvement over
just drawing once. The net gain is \(0.706 - 0.6 = 0.106\). Ramsey's
proof shows that we can keep on getting more evidence and we will never
be worse off. In fact, we will be better off as long as there is
evidence out there we do not yet have.

This result could be used to answer the Bayesian version of optional
stopping in this way: since getting more evidence always yields better
expected values, the ideal Bayesian agent will always opt for more
evidence, instead of stopping ahead just because the posterior has
reached her favorite degree.

However, I do not think this answer will do. To begin, the crucial
assumption here is that evidence costs *nothing*. The scenario we
imagined quickly breaks down once we starts to introduce some sort of
cost. It was assumed in the example that it costs us neither money nor
time to draw from the urn, but suppose it costs us 25 cents for each
sample. This means that we would be gaining only \(0.27-0.25 = 0.02\) in
expected payoff for the first draw, and the second draw would definitely
not be worth the additional 25 cents. Or suppose that one dollar is not
worthy any endeavor that lasts longer than 15 seconds, and it takes 30
seconds to draw from the urn. As soon as minimally realistic assumptions
are introduced, Ramsey's result no longer holds.

Cost might also enter into consideration in different forms. Savage
ponders over a case in which a very ill person, who is given the option
to find out with no financial cost if the disease she has is terminal.
Savage points out that an argument can be made that in this case
refusing information could be rational. The thought is that the patient
may decide that, based on an assessment of her own personality, she
would live the rest of her remaining life in agony if she were to find
out that her disease is very serious, whereas she could live relatively
happily without knowing. Savage's point is that in this case the
information is not really free; it has a *psychological*
cost.{[}@savage, p.107{]}

Ramsey and Good's proofs, while extremely valuable from a logical and
mathematical perspective, are somewhat tone-deaf to the actual problem
posed by Ayer and Keynes. The actual complaint was that the Principle of
Total Evidence *presupposes* that we know ahead what "total evidence"
amounts to, since the decision to get more evidence or simply sticking
to our current body of evidence is not one that be resolved just by
appealing to probability, because the rationality of such a decision is
highly context-sensitive. One important context is the *urgency* of
decision. For instance, "a general who refused to launch an attack until
he had ascertained the position of every enemy solider would not be very
successful."{[}@ayerpae 57{]}

The economist G. L. S. Shackle makes a similar point engagingly by
retelling the thought process of a certain Chinese guard who had to
decide on the spot whether or not to join the rest of the guards to
partake in a rebellion or to be the lone loyalist to stand in defense of
the empire. He argues that it would be rather foolish to suggest that
the guard should maximize his utility by looking for more evidence:

\textgreater{}{[}Had the guard taken heed of the advice given by the
expected utility theorist,{]} he might have argued thus: 'I find in the
record of history a thousand cases similar to my own, wherein the person
concerned decided upon treachery, and in only four hundred of these case
the rebellion failed to and he was beheaded. On balance, therefore, the
advantage seems to lie with treachery, provided one does it often
enough'... Had the sentry decided to support the rebellion, he might
have had time, just before the axe fell, to reflect that he would never,
in fact, be able to repeat his experiment a thousand times, and thus the
guidance given him by actuarial considerations had proven
illusory.{[}@shackles 2{]}

My point, of course, is not that making decision based on probability
and utility is irrational. Far from it, but, again, that rational
inductive thinking presupposes a deliberative framework. The context of
the story makes it clear that for the guard, "total evidence" really
just means whatever he has in mind at the moment, and it would be
irrational to suggest that he should get more evidence just because his
expected utility will improve.

Good, who proved the same result independently of Ramsey, tries to
address this issue by distinguishing what he calls Type I and Type II
rationality.\^{}{[}@goodthinking p. 29-30 As far as I could tell, this
has nothing to do with the distinction between Type I and Type II error
in Frequentist statistics.{]} Type I rationality is that of the ideal
Bayesian agent, one who lives her life by abiding to the principle of
maximizing expected utility. Good recognizes, however, that type I
rationality provides no guidance in regard to when an investigation
should be concluded. This is where type II rationality comes in: it is
principle of maximizing expected utility plus the consideration of "the
cost of theorizing." More important, the goal of type II is "a
sufficient maturity of judgments."{[}@goodthinking, p.29{]}

Good's two types of rationality could be interpreted as a concession to
there is a level of rational criticism that cannot be captured within
the strict framework of expected utility. Phrases such as "cost of
theorizing" and "maturity of judgment", it seems to me, are simply other
way to express the intention to stop. Intentions are, after all,
relevant in Bayesian reasoning.

\textless{}!-- Savage's response was intended to paint a counterexample
as an explainable exception to the idea that it's always rational to get
free evidence, but this sort of implicit cost is the norm, not an
exception: at the minimal, any endeavor to seek more evidence will cost
us at least time, and the loss of time is the loss of opportunity.
--\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- Furthermore, an optional stopper may also have incentive
to stop if the psychological *reward* she receives by proving her
hypothesis far outweighs the expected value paid by getting new
evidence. This was most likely the case with the parapsychologists, who
were heavily invested in demonstrating parapsychology is a legitimate
field. --\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- Cost might also enter into consideration in different
forms, e.g., computational cost or memory. In light of this, Ramsey's
demonstration---the value of evidence depends on how much evidence we
have and how much evidence there is to get---does not ease Keynes'
concern at all, but it makes the question of evidence gathering more
pressing: I might not be getting the most out of my evidential endeavor
if it turns out that I could be much better off by examining a different
hypothesis, for the very set up for Ramsey's proof requires us to have
already chosen *one* hypothesis of interest. But in reality, we often
have competing interests. The question is not whether I will get some
utility out of gathering evidence for hypotheses in which I have
interest, but how I should go about doing it, given the limitation of
resource. --\textgreater{}

\# Abduction, Resiliency, and The Weight of Evidence

The conclusion I put forth in the last chapter left open the question of
how exactly deliberative elements can be criticized from a Bayesian
perspective. This will be addressed in this chapter.

The basic strategy is to argue that we can have a complimentary
understanding of sensitivity analysis and the weight of evidence within
the deliberativist framework I have been suggesting. In particular, we
could conceptualize them against the background of the dynamics between
the abductive and deductive contexts of inquiry.

\#\# Counterfactual Priors, Hypothetical Likelihoods

Since deliberativism is a largely Peircean position, and Peirce's
epistemology is largely frequentist, a frequentist analysis of the
problem of optional stopping dovetails nicely the deliberativist thesis
that empirical data must be understood against the background the
deliberation that takes place prior the collection of the data. I will
end this chapter by first quickly going through the frequentist
perspective on the issue, and then suggest a Bayesian version that is
more compatible with probabilism.

\textless{}!-- We need a standard on which we can be justified in
asserting that the evidence we get from optional stopping is "bad data".
Consider *the Severity Principle*, a frequentist rule of inference from
error statistics.{[}@errorstat 162{]}

\textgreater{} **Severity Principle** (full). Data \(x_0\) (produced by
process \(G\) provides good evidence for hypothesis \(H\) (just) to the
extent that test \(T\) severely passes \(H\) with \(x_0\)

To say that a hypothesis to pass a severe test, roughly, is to that if
the hyp. More important, the principle, as Mayo and Spanos conceive it,
is highly context dependent: the ascription of severity is attached
specifically the particular test, the particular data, and particular
inference. So altering one of them would change the character of the
context, and therefore the status of severity altogether.

Deborah Mayo has defended this principle on both philosophical and
statistical ground. --\textgreater{}

It is especially useful here, because it is formulated with both
epistemology and actual statistical practice in mind.

\textless{}!-- hypothetical data --\textgreater{} \textless{}!-- model
checking --\textgreater{} \textless{}!-- deductive/abduction
--\textgreater{}

\#\# The Weight of Evidence

\#\#\# Keynes on Relevance and Weight

In *A Treatise in Probability*, Keynes discusses a great deal about how
probability ought to reflect our epistemic judgments. One type of such
judgments is the *judgment of relevance*. Keynes' observation is that we
often can judge whether one proposition \(E\) counts as being relevant
to another proposition \(H\) by considering whether the probability of
\(H\) would change on the supposition that \(E\) is true. Keynes's
example is that, in a typical urn example with some black and white
balls, if we want to know the probability of a white ball being randomly
chosen, the color of the ball would not change its probability of being
chosen, so the idea is that a ball's probability of being chosen
conditional on being (say) white is the same as the probability of the
ball being chosen in general. {[}@keynes, 59{]} So, Keynes proposes that
evidence \(E\) is irrelevant to the proposition \(H\) if and only if:

\[P(H|E ) \neq P(H)\]

Now that the notion of relevance has been introduced, we come to Keynes'
idea of the weight of evidence. Keynes is troubled by the fact that the
degree of a probability does not scale straightforwardly with the amount
of the evidence we have at hand. In a well-known passage, Keynes says:

\textgreater{} As the relevant evidence at our disposal increases, the
magnitude of the probability of the argument may either decrease or
increase, according as the new knowledge strengthens the unfavourable or
the favourable evidence; but something seems to have increased in either
case,---we have a more substantial basis upon which to rest our
conclusion. I express this by saying that an accession of new evidence
increases the weight of an argument. New evidence will sometimes
decrease the probability of an argument, but it will always increase its
`weight.'

The crucial idea here is the weight of evidence is closely tied to the
absolute amount of evidence and is conceptual distinct from the
"magnitude" of a probability. Keynes explains this as the distinction
between the *balance* and the *weight* of the evidence: he first brings
our attention to the fact that when we consider the conditional
probability of the hypothesis in question under all relevant evidence,
the resultant number constitutes the balance between favorable and
unfavorable evidence.{[}@keynes, 78{]} For instance, we may say that
when \(P(H)<0.5 <P(H|E)\), then evidence \(E\) is somewhat in favor of
the hypothesis. Of course, the balance changes as we gather more
relevant evidence, and it might go from favorable from unfavorable
depending on the nature of the new evidence.

However, as Keynes points out, this is not the only epistemologically
significant relation between probability and evidence, for we not only
care about how much the current evidence favors the hypothesis, but we
also concern ourselves with the *amount* of evidence involved in
calculating the balance of the evidence, and Keynes calls this measure
the *weight* of evidence. But, unlike the balance of the evidence, which
can go either direction, the weight of evidence can only go up as we
gather more relevant evidence. In Keynes' words, "New evidence will
sometimes decrease the probability of an argument, but it will always
increase its 'weight.'"{[}@keynes, 78{]}

To see what Keynes means, imagine two urns \(A\) and \(B\) with unknown
proportions of black and white balls. Suppose you sample (with
replacement) 100 balls from the urn \(A\) and find 50 black balls and 50
white balls. Justifiably, you infer that the proportion of black balls
in \(A\) - call it \(\theta_A\) is about \(0.5\). You then decide to
sample from \(B\), but this time you only manage to draw 4 samples, 3 of
which are black balls. Your best estimate for \(\theta_B\) is \(0.75\).
At this point, I offer you another chance to draw from one of the urns,
and if you manage to draw a black ball from that urn, you get \$100.
Which urn would you pick?

Clearly, \(\theta_B > \theta_A\), but it is not clear that \(B\) is
obviously the better choice, because the amount of evidence you have for
\(\theta_A = 0.5\) is higher than for \(\theta_B = 0.75\). This is a
problem for probabilism, because, in terms of just comparing the
probabilities alone, picking urn \(B\) clearly has a higher probability
of winning; however, all the facts in the situation are different than
what the probability lets on, so the probability has failed to reflect
some crucial information about the evidence.

Keynes was not the first to notice the problem of the weight of
evidence, it is one of many criticisms Peirce has for what he calls
*conceptualism*, a subjective position on probability that was heavily
influenced by Laplace. In particular, conceptualists accept of the
so-called Principle of Indifference, which says roughly that complete
ignorance should be modeled as a uniform distribution over all
hypotheses. In a typical case of estimating a unfamiliar coin's
probability of heads, this would mean that the expected value is
\(0.5\).

Peirce vehemently rejects this principle, as he argues that in many
cases, especially when the number of possible outcomes is ambiguous,
using the principle will lead to contradictions.\^{}{[}A simple example
would be determining the probability of an unknown object, for example,
a marble, having a certain color, say, red. Suppose I have no
information about this marble, so I have no reason to think the marble
is red or not.\^{}{[}Assume that the cover of the book has only one
color.{]} Following the principle, it would seem that
\(P(R) = P(\neg R) = 0.5\). However, we are led to contradictions when
we asks if the book is yellow, black, etc.; because, using the same
reasoning, we would say \(P(Y) = P(\neg Y) = P(B) = P(\neg B) = 0.5\).
The contradiction is that these are mutually exclusive propositions, so
axioms of probability say that their sum cannot go beyond \(1\). This is
not a well-known criticism, and is addressed by Keynes, but not entirely
relevant to our discussion.{]} It is in this context that Peirce appeals
to the notion of the weight of evidence.

Peirce's argument is pragmatic: conceptualists say that you should
adhere to the Principle of Indifference when you either have no
information. This means that the degree of belief you *should* have for
a unfamiliar coin landing on heads on the next toss is 0.5. However,
Peirce argues there is a behavioral difference between betting on a fair
coin and a unfamiliar coin. For the former you should know exactly how
much to bet, in the latter case you should simply refrain from betting.
The Conceptualist model, however, cannot make sense of this, since both
entail the degree of belief of \(0.5\). Nowadays this is usually known
as the *Ellsberg's Paradox*.{[}@ellsberg{]}

In other words, conceptualism fails to distinguish between *rational
indecision* and *indifference*. What distinguishes the two is the
difference in the weight of evidence. To recycle the example earlier,
further consider another urn \(C\), from which you draw 2 balls, and one
of them is white, so your best estimate would be \(\theta_c = 0.5\). If
probabilities can perfectly reflect the evidence, then it must mean that
your epistemic attitude toward \(A\) and \(B\) ought to be the same, but
Peirce insists that this cannot be the case.

\textgreater{} In short, to express the proper state of our belief, not
one number but two are requisite, the first depending on the inferred
probability, the second on the amount of knowledge on which that
probability is based.

The weight of evidence, then, is a crucial piece of the puzzle for the
position I am trying to defend. The goal of Deliberative Bayesianism
aims to situate Bayesianism within the Peirce's framework of abduction,
deduction, and induction. There needs to be

\#\# The Paradox of Ideal Evidence

Like Peirce before him, Karl Popper was highly critical of the
subjective interpretation of probability and the epistemologies that
sprung out of it. Popper has further develop Peirce's criticism as the
*paradox of ideal evidence*. The alleged paradox arises out of the
contradiction that, by accepting the notion of conditional relevance
proposed by Keynes, some evidence is both relevant and irrelevant.

Popper asks us to consider a certain coin with an unknown bias: let
\(N\) be the proposition "the next toss of the penny will yield
heads".{[}@popperlogic, 425{]} Now, what should \(P(N)\) be? He
suggests, either by appealing to intuition or the Principle of
Indifference, Bayesians would suggest that \(P(N) = 0.5\).\^{}{[}It
should be noted that Popper is not attacking the principle of
indifference in this context. That is, for this argument he is willing
to grant that Bayesians have some way of arriving at \(P(N)\)---it could
be by indifference, through elicitation, etc.{]}

Now let \(I\) be what he calls *the ideal statistical evidence* in favor
of the idea that the coin in question is a fair one. Popper's example is
to let \(I\) be a statistical report that says 'in a million tosses, the
coin landed on heads roughly half a million times.' The exact number is
not important, as long as the number of heads and tails would make it
practically certain that the coin is fair---the same point could be made
using 10 millions instead of a million. Now, given we have ideal
evidence \(I\), what is the probability of \(N\)? Popper claims that it
would have to be \(1/2\). So

\[P (N|I) = P(N) = \frac{1}{2}\]

However, as discussed earlier, evidence \(I\) is relevant to the
hypothesis \(N\) if and only if

\[P(N|I) \neq P(N)\]

If \(P(N|I) = P(N) = 1/2\), this means that the ideal evidence is also
irrelevant evidence. Popper then concludes:

\textgreater{} Now this is a little startling; for it means, more
explicitly, that our so-called `degree of rational belief' in the
hypothesis, {[}\(N\){]}, ought to be completely unaffected by the
accumulated evidential knowledge, {[}\(I\){]}; that the absence of any
statistical evidence concerning {[}the hypothesis that the coin is
fair{]} justifies precisely the same `degree of rational belief' as the
weighty evidence of millions of observations which, prima facie, support
or confirm or strengthen our belief. {[}@popperlogic, 426{]}

What is 'startling' about this? Popper's point appears to be that we
*expect* the awareness of evidence \(I\) should change our attitude
toward \(N\) *in some way*, but if our prior for \(N\) is already
\(1/2\), \(I\) will not change it in anyway, so on Keynes' account,
\(I\) is irrelevant. This seems to contradict with our intuition that
the ideal evidence should be relevant.

We can interpret Popper to making this following argument:

1. \(I\) is ideally favorable to \(N\). 2. \(P(N|I) = P(N) = 1/2\). 3.
According to the notion of conditional relevance, \(I\) is irrelevant to
\(N\). 4. But according to premise 1, \(I\) is relevant to \(N\). 5. 3
and 4 are contradictory.

The inferential step to arrive at premise 4 is not via the technical
notion of relevance, so as the argument stands, there is nothing
stopping the Bayesian from biting the bullet and insisting that \(I\) is
irrelevant to \(N\), or that \(I\) was never ideally favorable to begin
with. For his argument to be convincing, Popper needs to motivate an
external notion of favorability to establish premise 1, from which we
can (supposedly) derive a contradiction.

Of course, this response is not satisfactory unless Bayesians have a way
to say something about what exactly *I* is doing to our state of belief.
This returns to Keynes' initial observation: clearly *something* is
changed by the ideal evidence, but it is not \(P(N)\). One answer is
that it's the weight of evidence that changed, and it is manifested as a
property of \(P(N) = 1/2\)

\#\#\# The Statistical Perspective

There is a clear statistical answer from the Bayesian perspective that
could address the paradox. I will try to explain this briefly but
suggest why the answer, while making perfect statistical sense, is not
sufficient from an epistemological perspective.

In chapter 3, we discussed how we can use Bayesian methods to represent
our degrees of belief about a hypothesis regarding physical chance. The
same can be done here to address Popper's paradox easily.

The kind of trials involved in the paradox of ideal evidence can be
modeled as beta-bernoulli process, where the Beta distribution would
model our state of belief and the Bernoulli distribution the coin
tossing process. This can be seen as a special case of the binomial
distribution we used earlier. Here, the Bernoulli distribution has the
parameter \(\theta\), which is often interpreted as the probability of
success of a binary event, e.g., landing on heads, and thus in this
sense we are talking probabilities of a probability. Again, we canthink
of the parameter \(\theta\) as representing the *propensity* of the
coin. We then use the Beta distribution to model the propensity,
representing the degree of our belief in various hypotheses of
\(\theta\) having a certain value \(x\) where \(0 \leq x \leq 1\).

More precisely, let \(\theta\) be the propensity of the coin to land on
heads and let

\[X_i =
\begin{cases}
   1       & \quad \text{the coin lands on heads on toss $i$,}\\
   0 & \quad \text{otherwise.}
 \end{cases}\]

Now these random variables can be modeled as follows:

\[\theta \sim Beta(\alpha, \beta)\] \[X_1,...X_i \sim Bern(\theta)\]

As mentioned, the Beta distribution has two parameters, \(\alpha>0\) and
\(\beta>0\), which can be thought of as, in our context, our initial
opinion about the coin's propensity. What we did not discuss previously,
however, is that the beta distribution can represent different states of
belief that have the same expected value. Consider three beta
distributions:

1. \(Beta(1,1)\): 2. \(Beta(11,11)\) 3. \(Beta(500,001,500,001)\)

Note that all three distributions have the same expected values:

\[\frac{1 + 0}{2 + 0}=\frac{1 + 10}{2 + 20}=\frac{1 + 500000}{2 + 1000000}=\frac{1}{2}\]

However, even though these distributions produce identical expected
values, if we plot them, we can see that how they represent states of
belief that are drastically different:

!{[}Beta Distributions{]}(beta.png)

Intuitively, we can think of the first distribution as representing your
state of belief about the probability of getting a head on the next
flip. This distribution is plotted in Figure 1: note that it is wholly
flat, capturing the sort of state of indifference that the Principle of
Indifference is supposed to capture: One finds no ground in thinking one
probability is more credible than another.

The second distribution can be seen as our state of belief after
witnessing 10 flips of the coin, and 5 turn up heads and 5 tails.
Naturally, the peak - the mode of the distribution - is at
\(\theta = 0.5\), which seems sensible, because it reflects the evidence
that exactly half of the samples are heads. But we can see that at this
stage we are quite uncertain about \(\theta\), evidenced by the width of
the distribution. While \(\theta = 0.5\) is the peak, there is a
substantial area covering \(\theta > 0.55\) and \(\theta < 0.45\).

The third distribution, modeling the state of belief after one million
trials with half of them being heads, is intended to be an approximation
of Popper's ideal evidence scenario. The peak is again at \(0.5\), but
this plot has a noticeably narrower spread: we are much more confident
in our assessment that the coin has an equal propensity to land on heads
as tails. Also notice that at this stage, any value of \(\theta\) other
than \(0.5\) are practically impossible after receiving the ideal
evidence.

To state these observations more precisely, we can calculate the exact
probability using the corresponding cumulative distributions. Since beta
distributions are continuous distributions, we can only deal with
intervals of values. Still, we can provide a reasonably close
approximations. For instance, conditional on the ideal evidence, we
would be absolutely sure that the probability is between 0.46 and 0.54,
and practically certain, with the probability of 0.95, that it is
between 0.49 and 0.51. The relevant probabilities are summarized in the
following table:

\textbar{} Distribution \textbar{} \(P(0.46<\theta<0.54)\) \textbar{}
\(P(0.49<\theta<0.51)\) \textbar{} \textbar{} :----------------
\textbar{} --------------------: \textbar{} --------------------:
\textbar{} \textbar{} \(Beta(1,1)\) \textbar{} \(0.08\) \textbar{}
\(0.02\) \textbar{} \textbar{} \(Beta(11,11)\) \textbar{} \(0.29\)
\textbar{} \(0.07\) \textbar{} \textbar{} \(Beta(500001,500001)\)
\textbar{} \(1\) \textbar{} \(1\) \textbar{}

Now, let \(E\) be the ideal evidence, \(X_1,…X_{1000000}\), where
\(\sum_{i=1}^{1000000}X_i = 500000\), and let \(\theta\) be the coin's
propensity to land on heads. We now see that the following inequality
holds, since the left-hand side is \(0.02\), and for the right it's
\(1\).

\[P(0.49<\theta<0.51) <  P(0.49<\theta<0.51|E)\]

To make things more official-sounding, perhaps we can describe this as
*Higher Order Relevance(HOR)*. Recall Keynes's idea is that for some
evidence \(E\) and hypothesis \(H\)

\[\text{Evidence $E$ is relevant to $H$ if and only if }P(H) \neq P(H|E)\]

HOR takes this on step further and suggests that, in addition to \(H\)
and \(E\), consider specific values \(x\) and \(y\), where
\(0 \leq x \leq y \leq 1\)

\[\text{Evidence $E$ has a higher order relevance to $x\leq \theta \leq y)$ iff}\]
\[P(x\leq \theta \leq y) \neq P(x\leq \theta \leq y)|E)\]

Under this analysis, we can see that Popper's argument contains a
sleight of hand that shifts between two ways of thinking about N---the
next coin toss landing on heads---'s probability. The argument begins by
asking, rather innocuously, for your prior for \(N\), but the ideal
evidence \(I\) Popper immediately introduced is not for \(N\) but for
the hypothesis that \(\theta = 0.5\). Popper is reasonably explicit
about *that*, but what he is not explicit about is *this*: he has
convinced us that \(I\) is both evidentially ideal for and conditionally
relevant to \(\theta = 0.5\). That, however, is a misdirection, because
he immediately starts talking the conditional probability on \(I\),
*not* of \(H_{0.5}\), but of \(N\).

While I think that HOR provides a sufficient response to Popper's
paradox, it is not quite the same as accounting for the phenomenon in
question. In fact, by focusing on overcoming the difficulty raised by
the paradox caused by an absurd amount of evidence, we might have
overlooked what is truly at stake: rarely, if ever, do we have ideal
evidence for any substantive hypothesis, so situations where we have an
overabundance of evidence is an incomplete benchmark for the adequacy of
the account. In fact, our analysis shows that when we have perfect
information, evidential weight essentially becomes a non-issue, because
it eliminates the uncertainty that calls for probabilistic reasoning to
begin with.

The important question, instead, is whether HOR can help with decision
making in situations where evidence is severely lacking. To this end, it
remains to be seen how higher order relevance can trickle down to first
order probability, on which decision making is based within the
classical Bayesian framework.

We need to, then, ask ourselves if HOR as a concept can make any
practical difference in decision making. It is in fact difficult to do
so within the basic framework of Bayesianism. To see this, imagine a
perverse game in which you will be shot to death if a coin flip lands on
head. Clearly, you don't want heads. You are given a choice between two
coins: the first coin \(P\) is similar to Popper's coin from the ideal
evidence scenario, except now the ideal evidence actually shows that
there is a slight bias in favor of heads, say the expected value is
0.51. The other coin \(U\) is one you have never seen before, so on an
ignorance prior your expected value \(E(\theta_U)\) is 0.5 . Now, which
would you choose? An argument can be made that you probably still want
the Popperian coin, because you know you are almost certainly getting
\(\theta_P = 0.51\). From the perspective of expected utility, however,
it is hard to rationalize such a decision, because the unknown coin
still has a lower expected value. That is,

\[\frac{510000}{1000000}> \frac{1}{2}\]

So it seems that we are back to where we started - the relevance
demonstrated on a higher order simply vanishes when we consider the
matter on the level of decision making, which is entirely based on a
precise point-estimate of the first order probability.

If the point estimate is to be blamed, the natural response is that we
do rely on an interval estimate instead. This solution is reminiscent of
the call to abolish the use of \(p\) values in Frequentist statistics,
and instead we should report the confidence interval of our findings.
The idea is that point estimates are inherently misleading, since they,
by design, summarize the data by discarding information such as higher
order relevance. This problem is somewhat analogous to the one we are
running into with respect to expected values. So one possible solution
is that we should only insist on making our decisions based on *credible
intervals*, which is the Bayesian version of the confidence interval.
For instance, suppose \(\theta_P \sim Beta(480000,520000)\) and
\(\theta_U \sim Beta(1,1)\). We can deduce that

\[P(0.479\leq \theta_P \leq 0.481) = 0.99\]
\[P(0.005\leq \theta_U \leq 0.995) = 0.99\]

In other words, we can say there is a 0.99 probability that \(P\)'s
propensity to land on heads is between 0.479 and 0.481 (practically
0.48) and for \(U\) it's between 0.005 and 0.995.

However, it seems to me that we are simply restating higher order
relevance in terms of credible intervals, without dealing with the crux
of the problem - unless we are rationally allowed to refuse to follow
the precise expected value, even if the weight of evidence is low, we
will always have to match it to our best point estimate, which is the
expected value. Of course, the point is not that HOR doesn't matter,
because intuitively it does. The point is rather that we need a richer
philosophical framework to rationalize this intuition.

\#\# Bayesian Deliberation

\#\#\# The Concept of Resiliency

Skyrms credits Richard Jeffrey as the first who notices that Popper's
paradox brings light to the very idea of resiliency. Jeffrey points out
that once we stop fixating on the probability of \(N\), the next toss
coming up head, we can see that our state of belief prior receiving the
ideal evidence has a degree of malleability.{[}@jeffreydecision,
p.184{]} Consider, for instance, instead of asking only for the
probability of \(N\), we ask the probability of the next 5 tosses coming
up heads. Once we think about how our belief responds to how these 5
tosses would act as potential evidence, given our posterior state of
belief, we have very little choice but to believe that probability is
\((0.5)^5\), but we would be a lot less compelled to do so with the
prior state of belief.

\textless{}!-- Jeffrey also makes another interesting point: since
before any evidence we can be flexible with our choice of the prior, we
will learn more from evidence by choosing a higher prior.
--\textgreater{}

\textless{}!-- This suggestion about choosing a strategic prior is
especially interesting. Jeffrey has not spelled it out exactly, but we
will do so in the next subsection. We will first consider Skyrms' idea
about resiliency. --\textgreater{}

Skyrms has proposed the notion of *resiliency* to capture Jeffrey's
observation in a generalized manner: even though evidential weight is
not reflected by the probability, it is captured by its stability. The
idea that there is a probabilistic representation for a stable state of
belief can be illustrated as follows: if I have in front of me an urn
\(U\), with an unknown proportion of black and white balls. If I
randomly draw 2 balls from it with replacement and find one ball for
each color, my intuitive estimate of the proportion of black balls would
sensibly be somewhere around 1/2. But my state of belief should be
relatively unstable: it would be irrational for me to fixate on this
estimate, especially new light of conflicting evidence. If I sample two
more balls from the urn and they are both black, it would make sense for
me to raise my estimate for the proportion of black balls to more than
1/2---perhaps to 3/4. But suppose I continue to sample from for 996 more
times. Out of the total 1000 draws, 500 are black. At this point a
sensible would be back to around 1/2, but unlike my state of belief
after only 2 samples, after 1000 samples my state of belief is
stabilized: suppose I sample again and I draw five black balls in a row.
Now, even though drawing 5 black balls in a row seems rather
extraordinary, against the body of my evidence it would not warrant me
to revise my belief in any significant measure.

The intuition here is that the increase in the amount of evidence,
expressed here in terms of the number of samples, corresponds to the
increase of stability of the estimate. Skyrms has introduced a notion
called the *resiliency* to capture this intuition sense of stability.

Conceptually, this is an attractive way to capture to notion of
evidential weight. Keynes' puzzlement about how relevance and weight
could come apart is addressed; When a belief \(B\) is resilient, the
conditional probability on some new evidence \(E\) should be
approximately the same, that is, \(P(B|E) \approx P(B)\), even if \(E\)
would be highly relevant were \(B\) not resilient. If, for instance, a
resilient belief is one where the weight of the evidence for it is high,
then it is a logical consequence that evidence could make a belief more
weighty without changing its degree, for the weight is in fact
stabilizing this particular value.

Resiliency can also be demonstrated using the beta distribution, though
keep in mind that it is not meant to be a generalizable result, since
different distributions work differently. In any case, recall that
different sets of parameters can produce the same expected value. For
instance, consider \(Beta(1,1)\) and \(Beta(500,500)\). Their expected
values are, of course, the same, since
\(\frac{1}{2} = \frac{5000}{10000}\). But the second distribution is way
much resilient than the first. Suppose these are distribution functions
that represent the opinions of two different agents, but they both
receive the same piece of evidence from a Bernoulli process such that
\(X=1\). We do not have to do the calculation to see that they will
respond to the evidence pretty differently: the first agent will raise
her posterior expected value from \(1/2\) to \(2/3\), which is
considerable. The second agent's opinion, however, will barely be
changed. In fact, we can see that the second agent will have to see 200
successes *in a row* in order to raise the credence by \(0.01\):

\[\frac{5000+200}{5000+5000+200} = 0.51\]

Skyrms suggests that the resilience of a belief manifests itself as "a
reluctance to change."{[}@causationandconditional, p. 707{]} He suggests
that we can measure weight directly in terms of the difference between
prior and posterior probabilities.

\[\text{Skyrmsian Weight Resiliency of }(P(X)=y): 1 - |P(X|E_j) - y|\]

Where \(j\) is in the set of \(n\) possible states of affairs,
\(E_1,..., E_n\). Skyrms' idea is that we should pick a \(j\) that
creates the biggest difference.

The important consequence of this is that resiliency is that we have
again witnessed how context sensitivity is crucial in the interpretation
of the evidential import of a probability: \textless{}!-- Skyrms
suggests that the resilience of a belief manifests itself as "a
reluctance to change."{[}@causationandconditional, p. 707{]} Regarding
Popper's paradox, Skyrms argues that what the ideal evidence changes is
not the probability of heads, but the resilience of its probability at
\(0.5\).

More specifically, Resiliency is a property of a probability, for
instance \(P(N) = 1/2\) in Popper's problem. In other words, when we
speak of the resilience of a belief, in Skyrms' sense we are supposed to
be talking about the resilience of the degree of a belief at \(x\),
where \(x\) is a probability. Roughly speaking, Skyrms suggests the
resilience of \(P(H) = x\) can be measured by taking the difference
between \(x\) and the probability of \(H\) conditional on the most
relevant evidence imaginable \(M\) in some set of propositions. This
difference is the biggest possible swing of our belief in \(H\) could
take, in light of all possible states of affair under consideration.
--\textgreater{}

\#\#\# Imaginary Priors and Counterfactual Likelihoods
